MANUALDRIVER THE 2024
NEW JERSEY
www.njmvc.gov
WELCOME TO 
DRIVING IN 
NEW JERSEY! 
The New Jersey Driver Manual will help you learn and under -
stand safe driving practices. This manual provides valuable 
information that you will need to pass the knowledge portion 
of New Jersey’s driver test. The manual will offer you important 
safety information that can help you become a safe, courteous, 
and aware driver. 
If you already have a New Jersey driver license, this manual can 
help you refresh your knowledge and provide an update for new 
laws and rules of the road. Please remember:  
DRIVING IS A PRIVILEGE, NOT A RIGHT.  
The information contained in this manual should be used as a 
general guide to the rules of driving a motor vehicle but not as a 
substitute for the actual laws. If there is a discrepancy between 
what is cited in this manual and what is in statute or regulation, 
the statute or regulation governs. This manual is not a legal 
reference for New Jersey motor vehicle and traffic laws. 
You can access the Driver Manual on the New Jersey Motor 
Vehicle Commission (MVC) website www.njmvc.gov . 
This MVC Driver Manual is available at no cost.
Table of ContentsPage 
number
CHAPTER 1  The New Jersey Driver License System 2
CHAPTER 2  New Jersey Driver Testing 28
CHAPTER 3  Driver Responsibility 38
CHAPTER 4  Safe Driving Rules and Regulations 60
CHAPTER 5  Defensive Driving 88
CHAPTER 6  Drinking, Drugs, and Health 112
CHAPTER 7  Driver Privileges and Penalties 120
CHAPTER 8  Sharing the Road with Others 142
CHAPTER 9  Vehicle Information 156
CHAPTER 10  Motorcycle Manual162
Appendices Page 
number
CHAPTER 11  Driver Safety 210
CHAPTER 12  MVC Locations 224
 
Page  
1
1
The New Jersey  
Driver License System
Page  
2
Section Contents
4 Laws Governing Driver Licenses 
6 Digital Driver License
6 Types of New Jersey Licenses 
9 Identity Verification
14 Graduated Driver License (GDL)
19 Special Learner Permits for New Jersey Residents
20 Examination Permits for New Jersey Residents
21 Examination Permits for Out-of-State Drivers
21 Examination Permits for Out-of-Country Drivers
22 International Driving Permit (IDP)
22 Non-Driver ID
22 Organ Donation
23 Next-of-Kin Registry (Sara’s Law)
24 Motor Voter
24 Hearing-Impaired Designation
24 Commercial Driver License (CDL)
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
3
Laws Governing Driver Licenses 
• • A motorist who operates a motor vehicle in the State of New Jersey must 
carry a valid driver license, a valid probationary license, or a validated New 
Jersey permit. The motorist must also carry valid insurance and vehicle 
registration cards. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-29) 
• • A motorist with a validated New Jersey driver permit must be accom -
panied by an appropriately licensed driver. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-13, 39:3-13.2a) 
• • A motorist who changes addresses must report this change to the MVC 
within one week after moving. This includes individuals who are moving 
out of New Jersey. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-36) 
• • A motorist who legally changes his/her name (marriage, divorce, order 
of court) must report the change to the MVC within two weeks. (N.J.S.A. 
39:3-9a)
• • A motorist with a valid out-of-state license who moves to New Jersey 
must apply for a New Jersey license within 60 days (commercial driver 
license (CDL) within 30 days) or before the current license expires, which -
ever is sooner. The out-of-state license must be surrendered upon receipt 
of a New Jersey license. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-17.1, 39:3-10.17, 39:3-10) A motorist  
with a valid license from another country may drive with that license for 
up to a year. (N.J.A.C. 13:21-8.2(f)) 
• • Operators of commercial vehicles, such as large trucks, buses, and 
vehicles that transport hazardous materials, must satisfy more stringent 
testing standards than the drivers of automobiles or motorcycles. These 
operators must still possess a valid, basic New Jersey driver license prior 
to applying for a CDL. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-10.18) 
• • Individuals who have never had a driver license must complete the MVC’s 
Graduated Driver License (GDL) Program, which introduces driving 
privileges in phases with a period of supervised driving before getting a 
basic driver license. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-10, 39:3-13 through 39:13.4) 
Page  
4 THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEM
• • All applicants applying for a New Jersey driver license who are under 18 
years of age must present a completed consent form signed by a parent 
or guardian. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-13 and 39:3-13.3) 
• • All applicants applying for a Standard New Jersey driver license must 
provide proof of Social Security number, Taxpayer Identification Number, 
or an affidavit stating that they are not eligible for a Social Security 
number and do not have a Taxpayer Identification Number, 1 (one) proof 
of a New Jersey residential address, and 6 (six) points of identification. 
Documents must be in English or be accompanied by an approved 
translation. (N.J.S.A.  39:3-10 and N.J.A.C. 13:21-1.3 and 13:21-8.2) 
• • All applicants applying for a REAL ID New Jersey driver license must 
provide 2 (two) proofs of a New Jersey residential address, 1 (one) proof of 
full Social Security number, and 6 (six) points of identification, including  
documentation that verifies that their presence in the United States 
is authorized under federal law. Documents must be in English or be 
accompanied by an approved translation. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-3.10 and N.J.A.C. 
13:21-8.2A) 
• • Drivers under age 21 who possess an examination permit, special learner’s 
permit, or probationary license shall not operate a motor vehicle without 
displaying two visible reflective GDL decals, which are provided by the 
Motor Vehicle Commission, on the license plates of the vehicle. (N.J.S.A. 
39:3-13(g), 39:3-13.2a(a) and 39:3-13.4(f))  
 
Disclaimer: If there is a discrepancy between what is cited throughout 
this manual and what is in statute or regulation, the statute or regulation 
governs.
 
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
5
Digital Driver License
In 2021, New Jersey rolled out a long-
planned security upgrade with a new 
license design and modern security 
features. A digital driver license 
(DDL) will be issued centrally from a 
secure production facility. Customers 
can apply at Licensing Centers 
statewide and will be provided an 
interim license valid for 30 days. The 
DDL, along with facial recognition 
technology, helps to prevent identity 
theft and ensures that only those 
individuals who are legally entitled 
to have a driver license may get one. 
The DDL has more than 20 covert 
and overt features. Motorists under 21 
years of age will receive a distinctive 
vertical-format driver license. Driver 
licenses are valid for four years. 
Altering a driver license or presenting 
an altered driver license may result 
in the loss of a motorist’s driving 
privilege, a fine up to $1,000, and/ 
or imprisonment. Additionally, 
obtaining a driver license illegally 
may result in a fine up to $500 and/or 
imprisonment.  
Types of New Jersey Licenses 
The following chart shows age requirements, license fees, and required tests 
for each type of license the MVC offers. Testing for commercial and moped 
licenses requires the use of topic-specific manuals, in addition to this driver 
and motorcycle manual. Copies of the commercial and moped manuals may 
be obtained at any MVC agency, viewed online, or requested at www.njmvc.
gov. Manuals may also be obtained by calling (609) 292-6500. An endorse -
ment added to a license will expire with the license, except for Hazmat, 
which must be tested every 2 (two) years. When an endorsement is added 
to an existing license, the charge in the endorsement is prorated to cover the 
period remaining until expiration.
Page  
6 THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEM
Basic Automobile License  
(Standard/REAL ID) 
For all types of Class D motor vehicles 
registered by the MVC, except motorcycles.Expiration: 4 Years
Minimum Age: 18 (Permit: 16)
Permit Fee: $10
License Fee(s): $24/$35
Test(s) Required: KVR1
Probationary Automobile License 
(Standard/REAL ID)
For all types of Class D motor vehicles 
registered by the MVC, except motorcycles.Expiration: 4 Years
Minimum Age: 17 (Permit: 16)
Permit Fee:$10 + $4 Red  
reflectorized decals
License Fee: $63 
Test(s) Required: KVR1
Commercial Driver License  
(Standard/REAL ID)  
For large trucks, buses, and vehicles  
(Classes A, B, and C).Expiration: 4 Years
Minimum Age: 18/214
Permit Fee: $125
License Fee(s): $42 +$2 per endorsement/$53 
+2 per endorsement
Test(s) Required: CKVR1
Motorcycle License (Standard/REAL ID)  
For most vehicles with fewer than four wheels 
(Class E). Issued as a separate license or as 
an endorsement (M) if the individual already 
holds a basic New Jersey driver license.Expiration: 4 Years
Minimum Age: 17
Permit Fee: $10 +4 decals
License Fee(s): $24/$35
Test(s) Required: KVR1
Probationary Motorcycle License  
(Standard/REAL ID)
For most vehicles with fewer than four wheels 
(Class E). Issued as a separate license or as 
an endorsement (M) if the individual already 
holds a basic New Jersey driver license.Expiration: 4 Years
Minimum Age: 17
Permit Fee: $10 +4 decals
License Fee: $63
Test(s) Required: KVR1
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
7
Moped License (Standard/REAL ID)
For unlicensed motorists 15 years of age and 
older. Not needed if operator has a Class A, B, 
C, D, or E license. Expiration: 4 Years
Minimum Age: 15
Permit Fee: $5
License Fee(s): $6/$17
Test(s) Required: KVR1
Agricultural License (Standard/REAL ID)  
For farming purposes only. May be granted to 
persons between 16 and 17 years old. Expiration: 4 Years2
Minimum Age: 16
Permit Fee: $10
License Fee(s): $6/$17
Test(s) Required: KVR1
Boat License (Standard/REAL ID 
endorsements only)
For individuals 16 years of age and older, 
who operate a motorboat on fresh, non-tidal 
waters, such as lakes, creeks, or rivers, that are 
not affected by tidal conditions. All persons 
who wish to operate a power vessel must 
possess a Boating Safety Certificate and 
present it when applying for a boat license. 
For more information about New Jersey 
boating requirements, visit the State Police 
Marine Services website at www.state.nj.us/
njsp/maritime/index.html . (N.J.S.A. 12:7-61.1)Expiration: 4 Years2
Minimum Age: 16
Permit Fee: n/a
License Fee: $24
Test(s) Required: n/a non-tidal waters only
1 K-Knowledge, V-Vision, R-Road, C-Commercial.
2 Or until a basic license is obtained at 18 years of age.
3 Motorist must return to an MVC Licensing Center in one year to have license upgraded. Fee is 
prorated, and usually is $19.50 for standard or $29.00 for REAL ID .
4 CDL applicants must be at least 18 years old. Applicants under 21 may travel only in New 
Jersey (intrastate, not interstate) and may not receive HAZMAT or passenger endorsements.
5 Out-of-state CDL transfer fees are $10.
6 Class E licenses are $24; Class M endorsements are $18.
Page  
8 THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEM
Identity Verification
All Standard New Jersey driver license applicants must provide 6 points of ID Verification 
by presenting documents that prove their age and identity. All applicants must prove 
identity through a prescribed combination of documents that includes:
• • At least one primary document
• • At least one secondary document
• • At least six points of ID
• • Proof of New Jersey residential address
Use the charts on the following pages to select your documents or use the online 
Standard Document selector at https://www.nj.gov/mvc/license/6pointid.htm .
All REAL ID  New Jersey driver license applicants must provide verification by presenting 
documents that prove their age, identity, Social Security number and legal presence in the 
U.S. All applicants must prove identity through a prescribed combination of documents 
that includes “2+1+6”:
• • Two proofs of New Jersey residential address
• • One proof of full Social Security number
• • At least six points of ID
• • At least one primary document
• • At least one secondary document
Use the charts on the following pages to select your documents, or use the online REAL 
ID Document selector at www.state.nj.us/mvc/realid/selector.html .
For assistance with ID Verification, visit www.njmvc.gov  or call (609) 292-6500.
Note: Fees in this manual are subject to change. Current fees are available online at www.
njmvc.gov  or by calling (609) 292-6500.
If discrepancies exist within or between documents presented to the MVC, the applicant 
may be required to provide additional documentation. Any permit or license application may 
be refused if a document appears altered, false, or otherwise invalid.
*IMPORTANT INFORMATION
If your current legal name is different from the name on your civil birth certificate, you 
must show legal proof of the name change. Legal proof = certified marriage or civil union 
certificate, divorce decree, or court order linking the new name with the previous name.
Note: A divorce decree may be used as authority to resume using a previous name only 
if it contains the married name and the previous name and permits a return to use of the 
previous name.
All ID documents must be unlaminated, original, or certified copies, in English and 
have the required state or municipal seal. Certified copies of NJ records are available 
from the municipality that originally issued them and from the State Bureau of Vital 
Statistics at www.nj.gov/health/vital  or (609) 292-4087. If your birth certificate is from 
Jersey City/Hudson County, you must check: www.state.nj.us/health/vital/order-vital/
jersey-city-hudson-county-records .
Additional requirements may apply for non-US citizens; call (609) 292-6500.
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
9
NEW JERSEY STANDARD LICENSE & NON-DRIVER ID REQUIREMENTS 
Applicant must submit at least one document from the following.
Applicant must submit one document from the 
following. (Note:  All documents must display 
residential address and have applicant’s name)6
POINTS
+PROOF OF IDENTITY/PROOF OF DATE OF BIRTH
PROOF OF NJ RESIDENCYPRIMARY
• • US or US territory birth certificate or certified   
copy filed with a state office of vital statistics 
or equivalent agency in the individual’s state       
of birth
• • US Department of State birth certificate  
(Form FS-545 or DS-1350)
• • US Department of State Consular Report of 
Birth Abroad (Form FS-240)
• • US adoption papers
• • US passport or passport card
• • Foreign government issued passport from 
applicant’s country of citizenship
• • NJ digitized driver license (including  
probationary license)
• • NJ digitized non-driver ID card
• • US military photo identification card  
(Common Access Card)
• • Original birth certificate from any country
• • Photo driver license from any state, US  
territory or the District of Columbia Photo driver license issued by country other   
 than the US, must be presented with another   
 government issued document 
 Certificate of Naturalization                               
 (Form N-550, N-570 or N-578) 
 Certificate of Citizenship                                     
 (Form N-560, N-561 or N-645)
 Permanent Resident Card (Form I-551)
 ID card issued by a consulate or national          
 government
 Refugee Travel Document (Form I-571)
 US Re-entry Permit (Form I-327)
 I-94 stamped “Refugee,” “Parolee,” “Asylee,”   
 or “Notice of Action” (Form I-797 approved   
 petition) by USCIS
 I-94 with attached photo stamped “Processed   
 for I-551…” by USCIS
 Photo Employment Authorization Card (Form   
 I-766) (must be presented with a valid   
 SS card or proof of ITIN)
• • NJ driver license/non-driver identification 
card, or a Motor Vehicle Commission issued 
driver license renewal form
• • Property tax bill, statement, or receipt or any 
letter or correspondence received from the 
IRS or state tax office within the past year
• • Original unexpired lease or rental agreement 
with name of applicant as lessee or renter
• • Checking or savings account statement from 
a bank or credit union issued within the last 
60 days• • If under 18, statement from parent or guard -
ian certifying address of applicant
• • Utility or credit card bill issued in the  
past 90 days
• • A deed or title to real property 
• • First class mail from any government agency 
in the past six months
• • High school or college report card or tran -
script within the past two years
Page  
10 THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEM
Documents not written in English must be accompanied by a certified translation in English.
Applicant must submit at least one 
document from the followingNo primary or secondary documents can be expired 
more than three years.
+
SSNPROOF OF SSN OR ITIN*SECONDARY
• • Social Security Card (no copies)
• • W-2 Form issued within the past year
• • Pay stub (must include full name and 
full SSN) issued within the past year• • SSA-1099 Form issued within the  
past year
• • Non-SSA-1099 Form issued within the 
past year
• • Official document from the IRS or the 
New Jersey Division of Taxation display -
ing applicant’s name and ITIN.• • NJ income tax refund displaying ITIN• • NJ digitized driver license (including 
probationary license)
• • NJ digitized non-driver ID card
• • Photo driver license from any 
state, US territory or the District of 
Columbia
• • Legal name change court order 
signed by a judge or court clerk
• • Civil marriage or civil union license  
or certificate or divorce decree 
• • Document issued by US DHS
• • US Uniformed Services photo ID card
• • US Civilian Retiree photo ID card
• • Veteran’s Administration universal 
access photo ID card
• • Official school or college photo 
ID card with transcript or school 
records (with applicant’s DOB) from 
any country
• • NJ Firearm Purchaser card• • Driving privilege card with photo issued by 
any state, municipality, US territory or the 
District of Columbia
• • State professional license
• • NJ Public Assistance card with photo
• • SS card with SSA verification
• • High school diploma or GED, college diploma 
or trade school degree from any country
• • Bank statement/record on bank letterhead 
(can’t be used in conjunction with ATM card)
• • ATM card with preprinted name and appli -
cant’s signature (can’t be used in conjunction 
with bank statement)
• • Health insurance card or prescription card
• • Employee identification card accompanied 
by a printed pay stub from applicant’s em -
ployment in the US
• • Property tax statement, bill or receipt issued 
by a NJ municipality
• • For NJ high school students: a waiver certifi -
cate for the written portion of the driver test• • US govern -
ment em -
ployee driver 
license
• • US govern -
ment employ -
ee photo ID 
card
• • US military dis -
charge papers 
(DD214)
• • FAA pilot 
license
• • Certified 
adoption 
records from 
any country – 
other than the 
United States
• • NJ DOC ID 
card(No more than two 1-point documents allowed):
Legal proof of name change is a certified marriage or civil union certificate, divorce 
decree, or court order linking the new name with the previous name. A divorce decree 
may be used as authority to resume using a previous name only if it contains the 
married name and previous name and states a return to use of the previous name. A 
marriage or civil union certificate may only be used as proof of change to a last name.*Individuals ineligible for an SSN and who do not have an ITIN may submit a signed affidavit  form available on the 
initial license page of the MVC website WWW.NJMVC.GOV . The affidavit must be notarized, or signed in front of an 
MVC agency employee. False statements are punishable by law.Note: Commercial Driver License (CDL) applicants 
must provide proof of US citizenship or lawful 
permanent resident status in the US.
Revised 6/25/22IF verification fails  you must submit one of the following to 
include full name and full SSN:
ITINApplicant must submit one document from the following.Applicant must submit social security number 
on application for verification with SSA.
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
11
• • Certified copies of NJ records are available from 
the municipality that originally issued them and 
from the Office of Vital Statistics and Registry: 
www. nj.gov/health/vital  or (609) 292-4087
PROOFS OF RESIDENTIAL ADDRESS2STEPI
CONTINUE216 ++=
• • For a replacement SSN card visit:        
www. socialsecurity.gov/myaccount START 
HERE
NEXT
POINTS COMBINED FROM PRIMARY  
AND SECONDARY (REQUIRED)
PRIMARY SELECT ONE AND ONLY ONE DOCUMENT FROM PRIMARY.STEPIII 6NEXTPROOF OF FULL SSN1STEPII
• Social Security Card • W-2 Form issued within the past year• Pay Stub with name and full SSN• 1099 Form issued within the past year
Documents from steps I and II may 
also be used as secondary documents 
if listed as an option.Applicant must submit Social Security number on application for 
verification with SSA. IF verification fails you must submit one of 
the following to include full name and SSN:• Valid NJ driver license/non-driver 
identification card, or a Motor 
Vehicle Commission issued driver  
license renewal form (displaying 
residential address)• Utility or credit card bill issued in 
the past 90 days• Checking or savings account state -
ment from a bank or credit union 
issued within the past 60 days• • Original, unexpired  lease or rental  
agreement• Tax bill, statement or receipt, and/
or any letter or correspondence 
received from the IRS or tax office 
within the past year• First class mail from any govern -
ment agency in the past six months• If under 18, statement from parent  
or guardian certifying address of  
applicant
Unexpired  US passport or 
passport card
US or US Territory birth certificate 
certified copy filed with a state 
office of vital statistics or equivalent 
agency in the individual’s state 
of birth 
US Department of State birth 
certificate (Form FS-545 or DS-1350)
US Department of State Consular 
Report of Birth Abroad (Form FS-240)
Certificate of Naturalization 
(Form N-550, N-578, or N-570)Certificate of Citizenship (Form 
N-560 or N-561)
Current Permanent Resident Card (Form 
I-551) issued by USCIS ( with expiration 
date )
Unexpired  foreign passport with valid 
visa and I-94 (stamp or form version)
Current photo employment authorization 
card (USCIS Form I-688B or I-766)
Current Permanent Resident Card (Form 
I-551) issued by INS ( without expiration 
date )
Page  
12 THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEM
ALL IDENTITY DOCUMENTS MUST BE ORIGINAL OR CERTIFIED COPIES IN 
ENGLISH AND HAVE THE REQUIRED STATE AND/OR MUNICIPAL SEALS.
POINTS COMBINED FROM PRIMARY  
AND SECONDARY (REQUIRED)
SECONDARY CANNOT USE MORE THAN TWO 1-POINT DOCUMENTS.STEPIII
 Unexpired  standard photo driver license  
 from NJ or any state, or US Territory, and  
 the District of Columbia
 Unexpired  standard non-driver identifica-  
 tion card from NJ only 
 Social Security card
 Bank/credit union statement or record  
 (within the past 60 days)
 ATM/debit card with preprinted name   
 and applicant’s signature (ATM/debit card  
 and bank statement cannot be submitted  
 together)
 Current health insurance card or prescrip- 
 tion card displaying applicant’s name
 Current employee identification card with  
 pay stub
 State professional license 
 NJ public assistance card with photo   
 (also known as an NJ Social Services   
 identification card)
 High school diploma, GED or college   
 degree
 Property tax statement, bill or receipt   
 issued by an NJ municipality
 For NJ high school students: a waiver   
 certificate for the written portion of the  
 driver’s test
 Veterans Administration universal access  
 photo identification card Unexpired  federal government employee  
 driver license
 Unexpired  federal government employee  
 photo identification card
 US military discharge papers (FormDD-214)
 FAA pilot license
 US school photo identification card with  
 transcript or school records 
 US college photo identification card with  
 transcript  
 Legal name change court order signed by  
 a judge or court clerk 
 Civil marriage or civil union certificate or  
 divorce decree
 US adoption papers
 Current US military photo identification  
 card
 Current US military dependent card
 US military photo retiree card
 NJ firearm purchaser card  
 Unexpired REAL ID driver license, non-dri- 
 ver identification card, or probationary  
 license from any state, US territory and the  
 District of Columbia6
Note: Financial information can be blacked out.
Legal proof of name change is a certified marriage or civil union certificate, divorce decree, or 
court order linking the new name with the previous name. A divorce decree may be used as 
authority to resume using a previous name only if it contains the married name and previous 
name and states a return to use of the previous name.• • If the applicant’s birth certificate is from Jersey City/Hudson County, you must check: www.s tate.
nj.us/health/vital/order-vital/jersey-city-hudson-county-records/
Revised 6/25/22
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
13
Graduated Driver License (GDL)
In 2001, New Jersey sought to enhance driver preparation and safety 
by implementing a multi-stage driver licensing system. Known as the 
Graduated Driver License (GDL) Program, the system gradually introduces 
driving privileges to first-time drivers, extends their practice driving time 
and requires a minimum age of 18 in order to receive an unrestricted, basic 
driver license. GDL restrictions placed upon first-time drivers must be strictly 
adhered to. Failure to do so may result in a fine of $100 or suspension of a 
motorist’s driving privilege. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-10 and 39:3-13 through 39:3-13.8)
Page  
14 THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEM
THE EARLY BIRD ROAD
GDL: OPTION A
STEP 1Get a Special 
Learner Permit• • Must be at least 16 years old
• • Must have signed parent or guardian consent
• • Must be enrolled in approved behind-the-
wheel driver training course through the NJ 
Department of Education or commercial driving 
school
• • An approved instructor must purchase the 
permit
• • Must pass the MVC’s knowledge and vision tests
• • Must pay required fee
The MVC will validate Special Learner Permits ONLY after training course completion.
STEP 2Practice with 
an Adult 
Supervising 
Driver• • Must observe special learner permit driving 
restrictions
• • Must practice at least six months
• • Must have red GDL decals attached to vehicle 
when driving
STEP 3Get a 
Probationary 
License• • Must have completed six months of super -
vised driving without any suspensions or 
postponements
• • Must pass the MVC’s road test
• • Must be at least 17 years old
STEP 4With a 
Probationary 
Driver License• • Must practice unsupervised driving for at least 
one year
• • Must observe probationary driver license 
restrictions
• • Must have red GDL decals attached to vehicle 
when driving
STEP 5Get the Basic 
Driver License• • Must be at least 18 years old
• • Must have completed one year of unsupervised 
driving with probationary driver license 
restrictions
• • Must pay required fee
Note: Permit may not be used for practice driving until validated at an 
MVC Driver Testing Center.
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
15
THE YOUNG ADULT ROAD 
GDL: OPTION B
STEP 1Get an  
Examination 
Permit• • Must pass the MVC’s knowledge and vision tests
• • Must be at least 17 years old
• • Must pay required fee
• • Must obtain parent or guardian consent if you 
are under 18 years of age
STEP 2Practice  
Supervised  
Driving• • Must practice with an adult supervising driver
• • Must practice at least six months
• • Must observe examination-permit driving 
restrictions
• • Must have red GDL decals attached to vehicle 
when driving
STEP 3Get a  
Probationary 
License• • Must have completed six months of super -
vised driving without any suspensions or 
postponements
• • Must pass the MVC’s road test
STEP 4Practice 
Unsupervised 
Driving• • Must practice unsupervised driving for at least 
one year
• • Must follow probationary driver license 
restrictions
• • Must have red GDL decals attached to vehicle 
when driving
STEP 5Get the  
Basic Driver 
License• • Must be at least 18 years old
• • Must have completed one year of unsupervised 
driving
• • Must pay required fee
Page  
16 THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEM
THE ADULT ROAD
GDL: OPTION C
STEP 1Get an  
Examination 
Permit• • Must be at least 21 years old
• • Must pass MVC’s knowledge and vision tests
• • Must pay required fee
• • Must obtain parent or guardian consent if you 
are under 18 years of age
STEP 2Practice  
Supervised  
Driving• • Must practice with an adult supervising driver
• • Must practice at least three months
STEP 3Get a  
Probationary 
License• • Must have completed three months of 
supervised driving without any suspensions or 
postponements
• • Must pass the MVC’s road test
STEP 4Practice 
Unsupervised 
Driving• • Must practice unsupervised driving for at least 
one year
STEP 5Get the Basic  
Driver License• • Must have completed one year of  
unsupervised driving
• • Must pay required fee
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
17
SPECIAL LEARNER PERMIT RESTRICTIONS
No driving between 11:01 pm and 5:00 am
No using hand-held or hands-free cell phones or any other electronic 
devices.
Permit holder must be accompanied in the front seat by an adult super -
vising driver who is at least 21 years of age and who possesses a valid New 
Jersey driver license and has a minimum of three years’ driving experience
Passengers are limited to any parent, guardian or dependent of the special 
permit holder and one additional passenger.
Permit holder and all passengers must wear seat belts.
Must display decals on license plates.
EXAMINATION PERMIT RESTRICTIONS
No driving between 11:01 pm and 5:00 am1
No using hand-held or hands-free cell phones or any other electronic devices.
Permit holder must be accompanied in the front seat by an adult supervising 
driver who is at least 21 years of age and who possesses a valid New Jersey 
driver license and has a minimum of three years’ driving experience.
Passengers are limited to dependents of the permit holder and one addition -
al passenger, unless accompanied by a parent/guardian.1
Permit holder and all passengers must wear seat belts.
Must display decals on license plates.1
PROBATIONARY DRIVER LICENSE RESTRICTIONS
No driving between 11:01 pm and 5:00 am1
No using hand-held or hands-free cell phones or any other electronic 
devices.
1 If the Examination Permit or Probationary License holder is 21 years of age 
or older, hour, passenger and decal restrictions do not apply.
Passengers are limited to dependents of the probationary license holder and 
one additional person, unless accompanied by a parent/guardian.1
Probationary license holder and all passengers must wear seat belts.
Must display decals on license plates.1
Page  
18 THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEM
GDL DECAL
All GDL drivers under age 21, who possess a 
permit or probationary license, are required 
to display two visible, red reflective decals, 
distributed through the MVC, on any 
vehicle that they operate. One decal is to be 
displayed on the top left corner of the rear 
license plate and the other on the top left 
corner of the front license plate. The two removable decals are provided at 
the time a permit is issued for a fee of $4. Additional decals are available for 
$4 per pair at any MVC Licensing Center. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-13 and 39:3-13.4f)
GDL DRIVER EXEMPTIONS
Exemptions to the hours of rule for permit and probationary drivers under 
age 21: Proof of a need to drive during the prohibited hours for employment 
and/or religion. For an exemption, the motorist must carry a legible certifi -
cation to indicate this need from his/her employer or religious official on the 
official letterhead of the business, organization or religious institution, with 
the signature of the certifying official and his/ her name, title, address, and 
phone number. (N.J.A.C. 13:21-8.18)
Note:  If the student driver commits a traffic offense, responsibility will 
be with both the student and instructor or adult supervising driver. All 
motorists who possess a probationary driver license, whose probationary 
licensing period is not extended by the MVC beyond the standard 12 
months, must visit an MVC Licensing Center to upgrade to a basic driver 
license after the end of those 12 months. Motorists who fail to do so will 
remain subject to the probationary driver license restrictions and could be 
cited by law enforcement for violating the restrictions.
Special Learner Permits for New Jersey Residents
Any New Jersey resident who is at least 16 years old and is not in suspension 
status may enroll in a behind-the-wheel driver training course to obtain a 
special learner permit at any MVC Licensing Center. The applicant must 
have the signed consent of his/her parent/guardian, must be enrolled in a 
behind-the-wheel driver training course approved by the NJ Department 
of Education or conducted by a commercial driving school, and must pass 
the MVC’s knowledge test and vision screening. An approved course is 
six full hours of behind-the-wheel instruction in a dual-controlled vehicle. 
These hours are exclusive of time spent at the MVC for permit purchasing or 
testing. The instructor must purchase the permit, which is valid for two years. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:3-13.1)
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
19
After an applicant fills out the form with his/her personal information and 
provides 6 Points of ID Verification, proof of residential address, and proof 
of Social Security number, the instructor can purchase a permit at any MVC 
Licensing Center.
Upon completion of the approved driver training course and before practice 
driving, the permit holder must have the permit validated at any MVC 
Licensing Center with a Driver Testing Center.
Examination Permits for New Jersey Residents
Any New Jersey resident who is at least 17 years old and is not in suspension 
status can obtain a driver examination permit at any MVC Licensing Center. 
The examination permit is different from a student learner permit because 
the applicant does not have to be a student and an instructor is not neces -
sary. The MVC will validate the permit for practice driving after the applicant 
passes the required knowledge test and vision screening. Results are valid 
for two years (see Chapter 2).
Note: Most agencies conduct knowledge testing and vision screening. To 
find out which MVC Licensing Centers offer driver testing services, check 
online at www.njmvc.gov  or call (609) 292-6500 .
Note: A driver examination permit is required even if the motorist 
possesses a valid license from another state. See Examination Permits for 
out-of-state drivers.
 
Page  
20 THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEM
Examination Permits for Out-of-State Drivers
All out-of-state drivers are required to purchase an examination permit 
within 60 days of becoming a permanent New Jersey resident or when his/
her out-of-state license expires, whichever comes first.
Out-of-state drivers who are under 18 years of age and move to New Jersey 
are subject to this state’s GDL Program. If they wish to apply for a New Jersey 
license, they should follow the steps outlined for special and examination 
permit holders. Permits may be purchased at any MVC Licensing Center. 
Applicants are required to pass a vision screening test. Knowledge and 
road tests are waived if you have a valid, non-probationary driver license, 
or a certified driver abstract, issued by any of the 50 states, the District of 
Columbia, or U.S. territories.
Out-of-state driver licenses must be surrendered when the MVC issues a 
New Jersey driver license.
Examination Permits for Out-of-Country Drivers
A motorist with a valid license from another country may drive with that 
license for up to a year; the motorist may also be eligible for a New Jersey 
driver license. (N.J.A.C. 13:21-8.2 and 13:21-8.2A) 
See International Driving Permit section, next page.
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
21
International Driving Permit (IDP)
See Examination Permits for out-of-country drivers section, above. 
Visitors with a foreign driver license who travel to the United States should 
carry an IDP or attach an acceptable English translation to their national 
driver license. The IDP is translated into the official languages of the 
United Nations (including English) and is useful in traffic emergencies. 
Non-citizens must obtain the IDP in their native country before traveling to 
the United States.
New Jersey motorists who travel to foreign countries may obtain an IDP 
application through their local AAA club or the American Automobile 
Touring Alliance (AATA). Visit www.aaa.com/vacation/idpc.html  for more 
information.
Note: A motorist must carry a valid driver license. Although it is an 
official document, the IDP cannot replace a driver license, but it can be 
used in conjunction with the license to provide an additional source of 
motorist identification and span foreign language barriers.
Non-Driver ID
An individual, 14 years of age or older, who does not possess a valid driver 
license, may apply for a non-driver identification card. To obtain a Standard 
or REAL ID  identification card, the individual must show proof of age, 
residential address, and provide 6 Points of ID Verification as provided in the 
Standard or REAL ID document guides. The non-driver ID must be surren -
dered if the individual applies for and receives a New Jersey driver license. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:3-29.2 to 39:3-29.10)
Organ Donation
You have the power to give others the most precious gift: life. 
At age 14, you may apply for a non-driver identification card 
and you will be asked if you want to be included in New 
Jersey’s Donate Life Registry. When you turn 18 and apply for 
an unrestricted driver license, or renew your license, you will 
be asked if you want to be included in New Jersey’s Donate 
Life Registry. By answering “yes,” you will be agreeing to donate your organs, 
tissue and eyes upon your death to someone who needs a transplant. When 
you say “yes” at an MVC Licensing Center, the words "organ donor" will 
appear on your license. Registering as an organ and tissue donor has nothing 
to do with living donation or whole-body donation.
Page  
22 THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEM
An individual’s decision to be an organ donor can make a difference in lives 
throughout New Jersey and across the nation. Right now, tens of thousands 
of people are awaiting organ transplants, while thousands more need tissue 
and corneal transplants. The shortage of donors is so severe that every day, 21 
people die waiting for organs that could save their lives. You can give the gift of 
life simply by making your wishes known about organ and tissue donation.
Saying “yes” to organ and tissue donation is an important decision for 
everyone, especially the more than 5,000 New Jersey residents whose lives 
depend on transplants. Anyone 14 years and older can register as a donor. 
There are no costs to the family for donations, and donations will not affect 
funeral arrangements. Organs are shared according to a national list: age, 
gender, race, ethnicity or wealth do not affect who receives donated organs.
Registering as an organ and tissue donor is a selfless act. You should share 
your decision with your family, so they will carry out your wishes at the time of 
death. Organ and tissue donation saves lives, gives hope to those waiting and 
creates a legacy. For more information about organ and tissue donation, or to 
register online, please visit www.donatelifenj.org . 
Next-of-Kin Registry (Sara’s Law)
The Next-of-Kin Registry is a New Jersey statewide web-based system 
that allows individuals at least 14 years of age to voluntarily submit and 
maintain emergency contact information through the New Jersey Motor 
Vehicle Commission. This non-public information will only be used by law 
enforcement officers to locate designated emergency contacts if a person is 
involved in a motor vehicle crash that renders him or her unable to commu -
nicate. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-134.2 to 39:4-134.3)
Any individual who legally possesses a New Jersey-issued driver license, 
probationary license, learner’s permit, non-driver identification card or any 
other MVC-issued permit or license authorizing an individual to operate 
a motor vehicle or vessel (i.e., boat) may utilize the registry. Additionally, 
individuals as young as 14 years old may utilize the Next-of-Kin Registry to 
submit emergency contacts if they apply for a non-driver ID card. To register 
online or download a form to submit by mail, visit the MVC web site at www.
state.nj.us/mvc/drivertopics/nextofkin.htm . 
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
23
Motor Voter
The National Voter Registration Act (NVRA) requires that motor vehicle 
offices provide voter registration opportunities to anyone applying for a 
new or renewed driver license or ID card or changing his or her address. 
The process of registering to vote can be conveniently started at any MVC 
Licensing Center. Applicants who wish to register are provided a signature 
pad to sign, while their personal information (name, date-of-birth, address, 
etc.) is sent electronically to the State Board of Elections for review. 
When customers report a change of address, they are offered the option 
to have the MVC send the change of address information to the applicable 
board of elections for voter registration purposes. After the State Board of 
Elections approves the information received, it notifies the respective County 
Board of Elections that the applicants’ eligibility requirements have been 
met, and the applicants are registered to vote. For more information on voter 
registration, visit www.nj.gov/state/elections/voting-information.html . 
Hearing-Impaired Designation
A special driver license for deaf or hearing-impaired motorists (41 dB loss 
or more) is provided by the MVC. To obtain this license, which is designat -
ed with a numerical code, a motorist must complete an application which 
is available at any MVC Licensing Center. Verification by a physician or 
audiologist is required. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-11a)
Commercial Driver License (CDL)
There are three Commercial Driver License (CDL) classifications: A, B, and 
C. However, no one can apply for these licenses until he/she is in possession 
of a valid basic Class D New Jersey driver license or he/she possesses a valid 
out-of-state CDL.
Class A:  License is necessary for the operation of:
• • A tractor trailer, or any truck, or truck and trailer with a gross combina -
tion weight rating (GCWR) of 26,001 pounds or more, provided the gross 
vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of the vehicle being towed is more than 
10,000 pounds.
The Class A license also allows the driver to operate all vehicles in the Class 
B, C, and D categories, provided the driver has qualified for all the proper 
endorsements.
Page  
24 THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEM
Class B: License is necessary for the operation of:
• • Any vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 pounds or more.
• • A vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 pounds or more towing a trailer with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less.
• • A bus, including school buses, with a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 
pounds or more designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including 
the driver.
A Class B license allows the driver to operate all vehicles in the Class C and D 
categories, provided the driver has qualified for all the proper endorsements.
Class C: License is necessary for the operation of:
• • Any vehicle with a GVWR of less than 26,001 pounds, used and placard -
ed to transport hazardous material.
• • Any bus, including school buses, designated to carry 16 passengers or 
more, including the driver, and with a GVWR of less than 26,001 pounds 
and all school vehicles designed for 15 passengers or fewer, including the 
driver.
• • Any bus or other vehicle designed to transport 8 to 15 passengers, 
including the driver, which is used for hire.
COMMERCIAL DRIVER EXEMPTIONS
Taxi drivers, ride-sharing van drivers, funeral procession drivers, operators 
of rescue, first-aid squad or firefighter apparatus, farmers hauling their 
own products and equipment within 150 miles of their farms, non-civilian 
operators of military equipment and operators of construction equipment 
not designed for operation on public roads are exempt and need not apply 
for a CDL. Operators of recreational vehicles are also exempt, provided the 
vehicle is being operated only for personal use. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-10k, 39:3-10.11)
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
25
Commercial Driver License Endorsements
Most commercial drivers will need to obtain at least one special endorse -
ment. An example of an endorsement on a CDL is “H,” for hazardous 
materials, which means that the motorist may legally transport hazard -
ous materials.
CODE VEHICLE ENDORSEMENT SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
TDouble and 
Triple TrailersNeeded by oper -
ators of vehicle 
pulling two or three 
trailers Requires a knowledge test. 
Class A licenses required to 
operate this type of vehicle 
PPassengerNeeded by 
operators of buses 
or similar vehicles 
used to transport 
passengers Requires a road test. Other 
special requirements 
are necessary (see CDL 
Manual). Must be 21 years 
of age and have 3 years' 
driving experience 
SSchool  
BusNeeded by all 
school bus driversRequires a knowledge and 
road test. Motorists who 
hold an “S” endorsement 
will also have to test for 
a “P” endorsement. Both 
are required to operate a 
school bus. 
NTanker 
VehicleNeeded by opera -
tors of vehicles used 
to transport liquids 
or gas in bulk Requires a knowledge test. 
HHazardous 
MaterialsNeeded by 
operators of vehicles 
used to transport 
hazardous materials Requires a knowledge 
test. Must be trained 
and retested every two 
years. See the Federal 
Motor Carrier Safety 
Administration for  
requirements  
(www.fmcsa.dot.gov ). 
Must be 21 years of age. 
Page  
26 THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEM
COMMERCIAL DRIVER LICENSE RESTRICTIONS
Numbered restrictions, such as corrective lenses, are noted on all commer -
cial licenses. An example of a special restriction on a commercial license is “L” 
for air brakes. This means the motorist may not operate a vehicle equipped 
with air brakes, if designated on the license.
COMMERCIAL DRIVER MANUAL
For more information on commercial motor vehicle licensing, refer to the 
MVC’s Commercial Driver Manual. All CDL tests are based on information 
contained in the manual. To get a copy, visit any MVC Licensing Center or 
MVC Regional Service Center or view/request it online at www.njmvc.gov . 
Manuals may also be obtained by calling (609) 292-6500 .
THE NEW JERSEY DRIVER LICENSE SYSTEMPage  
27

2
New Jersey  
Driver Testing
Page  
28
NEW JERSEY DRIVER TESTINGPage  
29
Section Contents
30 Requirements for a Basic Driver License
32 Safety Pledge to Nikhil
33 Voter Registration
34 Road Test
36 Reasons for Rejection
Requirements for a Basic Driver License
6-POINT ID VERIFICATION
All applicants for a New Jersey driver license must have all required docu -
ments to satisfy the 6-Point ID Verification.
VISION TEST
A vision screening is required for all motorists. The MVC may refer applicants 
with impaired vision to a physician. Periodically, the MVC may require a vision 
recheck of a New Jersey motorist.
KNOWLEDGE TEST
The knowledge test consists of 50 questions: plus, a survey question about 
organ donation. The MVC offers the knowledge test in English, American 
Sign Language (ASL), and these foreign languages: Arabic, Chinese, French, 
Japanese, Korean, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Turkish, Hindi, Albanian, 
and Spanish. If the applicant cannot read in any language, headphones are 
supplied to administer an oral test.
If the knowledge test is not available in your native language you may use 
a state-approved interpreter, however, you must first attempt to complete 
the knowledge test in an offered language. If you fail to pass the test and 
feel you need an interpreter, please inform the MVC personnel at the testing 
location and they will make arrangements to secure an interpreter in your 
native language and pay the appropriate fees. Once an interpreter is secured 
you will be contacted by an MVC employee with the interpreter appointment 
date and time. You must inform the MVC of the need for an interpreter 
at least two weeks in advance of the date you intend to take the written 
knowledge test.
MVC-approved interpreters are also provided for Deaf or Hard of Hearing 
applicants. The MVC will pay the interpreter’s fees directly associated with 
the knowledge test after submission of a properly completed payment 
voucher form.
Page  
30 NEW JERSEY DRIVER TESTING
INTERPRETERS
An approved foreign language interpreter is:
An individual listed on the NJ Administrative Office of the Courts (Language 
Services Section) Registry of Interpreters and Agencies.
An approved deaf or hard of hearing interpreter is:
• • An interpreter certified by the National Registry of Interpreters for the 
Deaf and listed with the New Jersey Division of the Deaf and Hard of 
Hearing.
• • An interpreter who has been evaluated by the Division of the Deaf and 
Hard of Hearing and is on the approved list of professional interpreters, 
www.nj.gov/mvc/license/knowledgetest.htm . 
TEST REQUIREMENTS
SCREENING 
TESTSMINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
EyesightBasic License Applicants: 20/50 vision with or without 
corrective lenses. For sight in one eye only, that eye must 
meet the 20/50 rule and the applicant must have docu -
mentation signed by a licensed physician.
CDL License Applicants: 20/40 vision with or without 
corrective lenses in both eyes. Must be able to distinguish 
among red, green and amber lights.
Written80 percent, or 40 of the 50 questions, must have  
correct answers.
HealthInform examiner of health problems; a medical review 
may be necessary. Federal law and New Jersey regulations 
require commercial drivers to submit a CDL Holder 
Self-Certification form and a valid medical examiner’s 
certificate, if applicable, to the MVC. Medical examiner 
certificates must be completed by a federally certified 
medical examiner.
NEW JERSEY DRIVER TESTINGPage  
31
OUT-OF-STATE AND OUT-OF-COUNTRY APPLICANTS
Applicants may transfer a valid out-of-state license to New Jersey. 
Knowledge and road tests may be waived for applicants at least 18 years 
of age, who submit a valid, non-provisional driver license issued by any of 
the 50 states, the District of Columbia, the U.S. Territories of Samoa and 
Guam, Puerto Rico, or the U.S. Virgin Islands. The 6-Point ID requirements 
must also be submitted.
These applicants will be issued a four-year basic New Jersey license and will 
be required to surrender the out-of-state license.
Out-of-state applicants between 17 and 18 years of age who possess a 
valid out-of-state license will be given a probationary license for a period 
of one year and must comply with New Jersey’s GDL requirements and 
restrictions.
All out-of-country applicants must pass the knowledge test and a vision 
screening and may be required to pass a road test. Test results are valid for 
two years.
Safety Pledge to Nikhil
In August of 2015, “Nikhil’s Law,” which amends N.J.S.A. 39:3-41, was signed 
into law. Enacted March 1, 2016, Nikhil’s Law reinforces the dangers of failing to 
comply with New Jersey’s motor vehicle traffic laws.
THE PLEDGE
To ensure the safety of others on the road, passengers in my 
car, and myself as a driver, I pledge to obey traffic rules when 
driving and to be extra cautious and supremely attentive. 
Specifically, I will:
STOP COMPLETELY.                                                                                
I will come to a complete halt at any STOP sign and will never 
go through a red light.
STAY ALERT.   
I will strive to keep my hands on the wheel and my mind on the road.
TALK SAFE.   
I will use a hands-free cell phone system while driving and will not text or use 
a handset unless I pull over.
PLAN AHEAD.   
I will give myself an extra 5 minutes to get to any destination. 
STOP FOR NIKHIL SAFETY PLEDGE.                                                                    
Go to www.state.nj.us/mvc/license/nikhil.htm  to take the  Pledge.
Page  
32 NEW JERSEY DRIVER TESTING
Voter Registration
If you are eligible to vote in New Jersey, the process of registering to vote can 
be conveniently started at any MVC Licensing Center, while applying for or 
renewing a driver license or non-driver identification (ID) card. The MVC will 
report the information to the New Jersey Division of Elections.
Voter registration deadline is 21 days before an election.
If you will not be conducting a driver license or non-driver ID card transaction 
and wish to register to vote or change your address with the Division of 
Elections, please visit the New Jersey Division of Elections at www.njelec -
tions.org  or call 1-877-NJVOTER  (1-877-658-6837) to have an application 
mailed to you.
UPDATE YOUR VOTING ADDRESS
You may change your address online through the MVC website. After you 
change your address with the MVC, you will be asked whether you would like 
your address change to update your voter record. Be sure to click “Yes” when 
answering this question, and the MVC will send a notice to the Division of 
Elections, notifying them of your change.
An address change confirmation page will also be provided to you at the 
end of the transaction. Please visit www.njelections.org  for more voter 
information.
Your County Commissioner of Registration will notify you if your appli -
cation is accepted. If it is not accepted, you will be notified on how to 
complete and/or correct the application.
Address changes reported online or via mail with the MVC are forwarded to 
the New Jersey Division of Elections. If you do not receive confirmation of the 
change, please contact your local Commissioner of Registration. A listing of 
Commissioners can be found at NJ DOS - Division of Elections - Register to 
Vote!
Note : You are required by law to provide the Motor Vehicle Commission with 
your current NJ residential address. Address changes MUST be conducted 
online.
If you would like a copy of your driver license or ID with the new residential 
address, you can order a replacement license after you have processed 
your address change. 
NEW JERSEY DRIVER TESTINGPage  
33
Road Test
After an applicant passes the knowledge test and vision screening and, if 
applicable, an approved behind-the-wheel course, the MVC will validate 
his/her permit so that he/she can practice driving. GDL permit holders 
under 21 years of age must have a minimum of six months supervised 
practice driving prior to a road test appointment. GDL permit holders, 21 
years old and over, must have a minimum of three months supervised 
practice driving prior to a road test appointment. To make an appoint -
ment for an initial road test or a retest, visit any MVC Licensing Center or 
schedule online at www.njmvc.gov . Appointments may not be made by 
phone.
ROAD TEST CHECKLIST 
No practice driving is permitted on the test course or in the parallel parking 
area. Every road test applicant must bring all the items on this checklist 
to the road test site to take the test. Only ORIGINAL documents will be 
accepted.
• • 6 points of ID.
• • Validated permit (permit must be legible and cannot be laminated).
• • Valid inspection sticker on vehicle or official “No Inspection Sticker 
Required” card, valid registration card and valid insurance ID card or 
electronic version for vehicle used for the test (unless covered by BPU or 
federal DOT regulations).
• • 2 red GDL decals, properly mounted (if Graduated Driver License (GDL) 
requirements are applicable).
• • A vehicle utilized for the road test must have unobstructed access to the 
foot brake or to the parking brake mounted to the right of the driver in a 
position accessible to the examiner.
• • Autocycles cannot be used for the test.
Page  
34 NEW JERSEY DRIVER TESTING
• • Self-parking vehicles cannot be used for the test.
• • All signals, brake lights, and windshield wipers on the vehicle must be 
in working order for the test.
• • No rental cars are permitted unless the test applicant’s name is listed as a 
driver on the rental agreement.
• • Applicant must be accompanied by a licensed driver. (The accompanying 
driver must hold a valid license to operate the type of vehicle for which 
the applicant has a permit, except for a moped.)
Note: Vehicles registered out of state must comply with the laws of the 
motorist’s home state about insurance identification.
ACCOMPANYING DRIVER REQUIREMENTS
An applicant may drive a properly registered vehicle to the road test area. 
However, a licensed driver must always remain in the vehicle with the 
applicant. A vehicle may not be moved, even in the road test line, without a 
licensed driver in the vehicle. If the accompanying motorist is licensed in a 
state other than New Jersey, or has less than three years of driving experi -
ence, he/she must drive the vehicle to the road test area. The MVC does not 
supply vehicles for road tests. Only MVC examiners are allowed in the vehicle 
when the test is administered.
ELEMENTS OF THE ROAD TEST
During the road test, an MVC examiner will ride with the applicant when he/
she drives in an off-road test area or on a public road course. The purpose of 
the road test is to make sure that the applicant understands the rules of the 
road and can drive safely. (See chart on next page.)
If the applicant’s vehicle has a standard transmission, the examiner will ask 
the applicant to demonstrate his/her ability to correctly shift gears.
NEW JERSEY DRIVER TESTINGPage  
35
During the basic road test, the examiner will test the applicant on the following items:
TEST IT PAGE
Driving in reverse 54, 55
Following other vehicles 94, 95, 96
Nearing corners, intersections 65, 66, 67, 68
Parking (parallel) 57, 58, 59
Sitting properly (seat belt use) 40, 41
Starting a vehicle 48, 49, 50
Steering properly 51, 52
Stopping at signs 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79
Stopping smoothly 52, 53
Turning 55, 56, 72, 73, 74
Turning around 55, 56, 57
Using the horn 46
Yielding right-of-way 65, 66
If an applicant passes the road test, the examiner will issue an authorization 
for licensing. The permit, authorization, and 6 Points of ID Verification must 
be taken to an MVC Licensing Center to obtain a New Jersey driver license. 
The MVC will license a successful applicant for a Class D basic driver license 
or Class D license for a probationary driver if the applicant has never been 
licensed to drive a motor vehicle in this or any other state. The MVC will 
monitor his/her driving habits for one year.
Reasons for Rejection
Most applicants believe that their driving performance is the only criterion 
the examiner uses to grade their road test. However, the vehicle may be 
the cause for denial or failure of the road test. Some license applicants may 
not have the opportunity to take an initial road test because an examiner 
considers the vehicle unsuitable or unsafe for the test.
Page  
36 NEW JERSEY DRIVER TESTING
Here are some of the more common reasons the MVC rejects road test 
vehicles:
• • Improper, expired or no inspection sticker
• • Lack of examiner access to foot brake or parking brake
• • Any defect or condition that affects the safe operation of the test vehicle, 
such as but not limited to:
• • Poor brakes (pedal must not fade or go to the floorboard)
• • Dashboard brake warning light on
• • Parking brake, brake lights, or signal lights not working 
• • Unsafe tires (smooth, cut, badly worn) 
• • Vehicle interior is not in reasonably clean condition 
• • Vehicle failed inspection, and motorist does not bring the Vehicle 
Inspection Report issued by the inspection station to the road test area 
• • Fast engine idle (cannot judge speed control)
• • Missing seat belts (seat belts are required on all vehicles manufactured 
after July 1, 1966)
• • Tinting on driver and/or front door windows
• • Missing rear-view mirrors – interior and/or driver door
• • Broken or cracked window glass
• • Passenger and/or driver’s door or window does not operate from the 
inside
• • Additional items for motorcycles and moped tests only:
• • Lack of equipment required by state regulations
• • No helmet
• • Unapproved goggles or face shield
• • No bell or horn that can be heard 100 feet away
See Motorcycle Manual (Chapter 10)  for more specific information.
NEW JERSEY DRIVER TESTINGPage  
37
3
Driver Responsibility
Page  
38
Page  
39 DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY
Section Contents
40 Buckle up – New Jersey’s Seat Belt Law
41 Car Seats
42 Child Passenger Safety Law
43 Air Bags
45 Car Condition
47 Carbon Monoxide Poisoning
48 Starting a Parked Car
51 Steering
52 Stopping Distances
53 Proper Braking
54 Driving Signals
54 Driving in Reverse
55 Turning
57 Parking
Safe driving is the responsibility of all individuals who operate a vehicle on 
New Jersey roads. The rules of the road must always be obeyed, and laws 
must be strictly followed. A motorist must ensure the safety of all passen -
gers who are riding in his/her vehicle and be mindful of the other motorists 
who share the road each day.
Buckle up – New Jersey’s Seat Belt Law
Under state law, the driver, and all passengers of a passenger vehicle (e.g., car, 
van, pickup truck, and SUV) must wear a seatbelt. The failure of a driver, front-
seat passenger, and children under age 18 to wear a seatbelt is a primary 
offense. The driver is responsible for all passengers under age 18. Front-seat 
passengers 18 years of age and over are responsible for themselves. A police 
officer can stop a motorist solely for a violation of the seat belt law. Under 
a secondary law, all unbuckled back seat occupants 18 years of age and 
older may be issued a summons if the vehicle is stopped for another reason. 
Motorists with GDL permits or probationary licenses must use seat belts. 
Additionally, they must require all passengers seated anywhere in the vehicle 
to use seat belts. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.2f, 39:3-13, 39:3-13.2a, 39:3-13.4)
The exemptions are any passenger vehicle manufactured before July 1, 
1966, a passenger vehicle that is not required to be equipped with seat belt 
systems under federal law, or a physical or medical reason, verified in writing 
by a licensed physician, which makes the motorist or passenger unable to 
wear a seat belt. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.2g)
The driver of a passenger vehicle including cars, vans, pickup trucks, and 
utility vehicles shall secure any passenger using a wheelchair in a properly 
adjusted and fastened wheelchair and occupant securement device. (N.J.S.A. 
39:3-76.21)
Seat belts can save a life and improve a motorist’s chances of surviving a 
crash by 60 percent. A motorist’s chances of surviving a crash are three to 
four times better if he/ she is wearing both a seat belt and a shoulder strap. 
Fastening a seat belt takes only three seconds and reduces the chances of 
death or injury. Seat belts help in many ways, for example:
• • They keep motorists and passengers from being thrown from the vehicle 
in a crash. If a motorist/passenger is held in place, any injury may be less 
severe.
Page  
40
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY
• • They slow a body down with the vehicle. If a vehicle hits something, 
the vehicle stops, but the person keeps going at the same speed that 
the vehicle was moving. Hitting the dashboard or windshield at 30 
mph is like falling from the top of a three-story building.
• • They keep a motorist/passenger from sliding on the seat during sudden 
stops and turns. Belts and straps also keep a motorist in position so he/ 
she can control the vehicle.
TIPS FOR SEAT BELT SAFETY
• • Buckle up with both lap and shoulder belts on every trip. (Air bags are 
supplemental protection for drivers.)
• • Wear the lap belt under the abdomen and low across the hips. The 
shoulder portion should come over the collar bone, away from the neck, 
and cross over the breastbone. The shoulder belt in most new vehicles 
can be adjusted on the side pillar to improve fit.
• • Know how to adjust the seat belts and how to release them if motorists/
passengers have to quickly get out of the vehicle.
• • Buckle up if riding in the backseat; use center seat belts if those seats 
are used. Seat belts help prevent riders from falling forward.
• • Never put more than one person in one belt.
Car Seats
Traffic crashes are a leading killer of children. When riding in a vehicle, 
children should be held in place by a restraint system that meets all 
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards. Refer to the paragraph on Child 
Restraint Law.
All child restraint systems built since January 1, 1981, must be designed 
to pass tough safety tests. These seats carry a label that gives the date of 
manufacture and reads, “This child restraint system conforms to all applica -
ble Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards.”
There are many types and styles of car seats. While some seats are designed 
to be used facing forward, once a child has reached the appropriate weight, 
an infant seat must never be faced forward. To do so would be extremely 
dangerous. Always check the label on a car seat to find out the size and 
weight of the child the seat is designed to protect.
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITYPage  
41
Using the car seat every time a child rides in the vehicle – and using it 
correctly each time – is especially important for the safety of the child. Always 
read the instructions that come with the seat and follow them very carefully. 
Correct use of the car seat is the best protection a motorist can offer a child. 
For more information on child car seats, contact the Division of Highway 
Traffic Safety at (800) 422-3750  or visit www.njsaferoads.com .
Child Passenger Safety Law
The New Jersey child passenger safety law, N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.2a (a) to 39:3-
76.2a (d), states:
• • Children under age eight who are less than 57 inches (4 feet, 9 inches) tall 
must ride in either:
a) A federally approved forward facing child passenger restraint 
system that is equipped with a five-point harness in a rear seat of 
the motor vehicle. Once they outgrow the top height or weight 
recommendations made by the child passenger restraint system 
manufacturer, children must ride in a federally approved booster 
seat (in a rear seat of the motor vehicle), 
 OR
b) A federally approved booster seat (in a rear seat of the motor vehicle).
• • Children under age four who weigh less than 40 pounds must ride:
a) In a federally approved rear-facing child passenger restraint system 
that is equipped with a five-point harness in a rear seat of the motor 
vehicle. Once they outgrow the top height or weight recommenda -
tions posted by the manufacturer of the child passenger restraint 
system, children must ride in a federally approved forward-facing 
child passenger restraint system that is equipped with a five-point 
harness in a rear seat of the motor vehicle, OR
b) In a federally approved forward-facing child passenger restraint 
system that is equipped with a five-point harness in a rear seat of 
the motor vehicle.
• • Children under age two and those who weigh less than 30 pounds must 
ride in a federally approved rear-facing child passenger restraint system 
that is equipped with a five-point harness.
Page  
42
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY
All children under age eight must be seated in a rear seat. If there are no 
rear seats in the motor vehicle in which the children under age eight are 
riding, the children must be secured in a federally approved child passen -
ger restraint system or booster seat in a front seat of the motor vehicle. 
However, children cannot be secured in a rear-facing child passenger 
restraint system in a front seat of any motor vehicle that is equipped with 
a passenger-side airbag that is not disabled or turned off.
Failure to comply with this law can subject a person to a fine of not less than 
$50 nor more than $75, plus fees and court costs. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.2d)
Note: A person operating an autocycle shall not permit a child to be a 
passenger in the autocycle if the child would be required to be secured in a 
child passenger restraint system, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.2a.
Air Bags
Air bags are standard equipment in almost all new vehicles and are designed 
to supplement seat belts in frontal crashes. Federal safety standards require 
that manufacturers equip all new passenger cars and light trucks with air 
bags. According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
statistics show that from 1987 to 2015, frontal air bags saved 44,869 lives.
Air bags inflate at speeds of up to 200 mph to protect adults in a front-end 
crash. An average-sized adult who is correctly belted is not likely to encoun -
ter the air bag until it is fully inflated.
When air bags are combined with lap/shoulder seat belts, they have saved 
many adult lives and prevented many injuries in motor vehicle crashes. 
However, air bags could seriously injure or kill children who are sitting in the 
front seat.
In 1995, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) allowed 
cutoff switches in pickup trucks, sports cars, and autos with no backseat. In 
January 1998, it allowed repair shops and dealers to install the switches in 
vehicles after the appropriate application was made for people in these or 
the following categories:
• • Driver and passenger-side air bags:  
For individuals with medical conditions when the risks of a deploying 
air bag exceed the risks of impacting the steering wheel, dashboard or 
windshield.
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITYPage  
43
• • Driver-side air bags only:   
For individuals who cannot properly operate the vehicle and keep at least 
10 inches between the center of the steering wheel and the center of the 
breastbone.
• • Passenger-side air bags only: For individuals who must place infants 
in the front seat because the vehicle has no rear seat (e.g., a pickup 
truck) or the rear seat is too small to hold the child’s rear-facing 
seat, or the motorist must monitor the child’s medical condition; for 
individuals who must place children, 1 to 12 years old, in the front 
seat because the vehicle has no rear seat, or because the individual 
must transport more children than can be seated in the rear seat, or 
because the motorist must monitor the child’s medical condition.
For more about an air bag on-off switch or for an application to request one, 
call NHTSA’s toll-free Auto Safety Hotline at (800) 424-9393. Information is 
also available online at www.nhtsa.gov .
Children of any age are safest when they are belted properly in the back seat 
of a vehicle, especially when the vehicle is equipped with a passenger-side air 
bag. Other safety points:
• • Always put an infant in a rear-facing infant child safety seat in the back seat 
of a vehicle with air bags. 
• • Always be sure that children 12 years old and younger ride in the backseat 
of the vehicle.
• • Always make sure everyone is buckled up.
A motorist can tell if his/her vehicle has an air bag by the words “air bag” 
or the letters “SRS” (supplemental restraint system) or “SIR” (supple -
mental inflatable restraint) on the steering wheel and dashboard panel. 
Manufacturers also may mark the sun visors or the sides of the open-door 
frame with warning labels or enter a warning in the vehicle’s owner’s manual.
Page  
44
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY
Car Condition
It is the responsibility of all vehicle owners to ensure that their vehicles are 
in proper working condition. Always check your vehicle before driving and 
prevent problems with regular maintenance and care.
BACKUP LIGHTS
When driving in reverse, backup lights should be on. These must be checked 
to make sure they are in working order. 
Note: It is against New Jersey law (N.J.S.A. 39:3-52) to have any backup 
lights on while a vehicle is moving forward.
BRAKES
A motorist should be able to brake smoothly and quickly. If the vehicle pulls 
to one side when it stops or a motorist feels a taut pedal or hears an unusual 
squealing or grinding, the brakes must be checked. With conventional disc 
and drum brakes, a motorist should pump them gently after driving through 
water to test them and dry them out. If the brakes are hit hard, they could 
lock up. A motorist should be able to stop within 25 feet at 20 mph. This can 
be tried in an empty parking lot. Chalk marks can be made on the surface to 
see if the vehicle can stop within that distance. If a vehicle has an anti-lock 
braking system (ABS), the brakes can be tested by applying steady pressure 
to the brake pedal. A motorist should never pump an ABS or jerk the steering 
wheel when braking. On very soft surfaces, such as loose gravel or unpacked 
snow, an ABS system may lengthen stopping distance. In wet or slippery 
conditions, a motorist should still drive carefully, always keep a safe distance 
from the vehicle in front and maintain a speed consistent with the road 
conditions.
BRAKE LIGHTS
If a vehicle’s brake lights are not working, someone may crash into the 
vehicle from the back. A motorist should have someone help to check the 
brake lights. Replace broken light covers; they may cause glare that affects 
the motorist in back.
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITYPage  
45
HEADLIGHTS
Bright and dim lights must work and be properly aligned. A motorist can 
check them against a garage wall or on parked vehicles. Lights should be 
kept clean. If other motorists flash their lights while another motorist’s lights 
are on low beam, it could be that the lights are out of line.
HORN
A horn should not be overused, but a motorist should check it often to make 
sure it works. Use the horn to signal when passing, when coming out of a 
blind alley, curve, or driveway, or to warn another motorist of a potentially 
dangerous situation.
STEERING
On straight level roads, a vehicle should hold a straight course. The front end 
should not vibrate (shimmy). The steering should respond to a motorist’s 
turns without too much play in the steering wheel.
TAILLIGHTS
Always keep tail and side lights in working order. They signal other motorists 
in the dark and prevent crashes.
TIRES
If a motorist feels or hears any unusual thumping while driving, he/she 
should check the tires. Bumps, cuts or bad tread can cause blowouts. Tire 
pressure should be checked often, especially when tires are cold. A motorist 
should check the owner’s manual or the door jamb of the driver’s door to 
determine proper tire pressure or should ask for advice at a service station. 
Properly inflated tires save money in fuel consumption. A vehicle should not 
be driven with tires that have less than 1/16 inch of tread (about the edge of a 
penny). To hold on to the road properly, tires must match (do not mix radials 
with other tire types) and must have enough tread.
TURN SIGNALS
A motorist should be able to hear the clicking and see the lighted arrows of 
turn signals flash on the dashboard. If the turn signals do not work, they must 
be fixed as soon as possible. A motorist should use hand signals until the 
turn signals are repaired.
Page  
46
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY
WINDSHIELD
Cracks or chips in a windshield could cause the windshield to break, 
causing a dangerous condition. Broken windshields should be repaired, or, if 
appropriate, replaced. A windshield should always be clean, inside and out. 
Windshield wipers should always work. A motorist can use non-freezing 
spray to stop windshield icing. New Jersey law prohibits add-on tinting on 
windshields and front side windows. (N.J.S.A 39:3-74)
SNOW AND ICE
State law (N.J.S.A. 39:4-77.1) requires a motorist to remove snow or ice from 
a vehicle before driving it. If snow or ice dislodges from a moving vehicle, 
it could strike another vehicle or pedestrian, causing injury or property 
damage. A motorist is required to make all reasonable efforts to remove 
accumulated ice or snow from the exposed surfaces of his or her motor 
vehicle prior to driving it, including the hood, trunk, roof, and windshield. Any 
person who violates this law is subject to fines of $25 to $75, regardless of 
whether any snow or ice is dislodged from the vehicle. If dislodged snow or 
ice causes injury or property damage, fines up to $1,500 may be assessed.
Carbon Monoxide Poisoning
The Rosa-Bonilla Family Act (N.J.S.A. 39:3-10, N.J.S.A. 39:3-41, N.J.S.A. 39:3-
12.6) requires the Motor Vehicle Commission to educate motorists about the 
dangers of carbon monoxide poisoning from motor vehicles and techniques 
for the safe operation and proper maintenance of a motor vehicle. Carbon 
monoxide (CO) is an odorless, colorless gas that is present in a vehicle’s 
exhaust. Modern vehicles are equipped with pollution controls that greatly 
reduce the amount of CO that is emitted from the tailpipe. However, certain 
conditions can cause dangerous levels of CO to accumulate in or around a 
vehicle, with potentially fatal results.
These conditions can include:
• • Operating a vehicle with an exhaust leak or poorly tuned engine.
• • Operating a vehicle with the trunk or rear tailgate open.
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITYPage  
47
• • Operating a vehicle with holes in the body of the vehicle.
• • Idling a vehicle in a garage or confined space, even with the outside 
garage door open.
• • Operating a vehicle with a tailpipe that is blocked by debris, including 
snow, leaves or water. 
Some of the most common symptoms of CO poisoning are listed below. 
It is important to understand that CO can kill even before any of these 
symptoms are noticed:
• • Headache
• • Dizziness
• • Loss of consciousness
• • Nausea/vomiting
• • Chest pain
• • Confusion
If you suspect that someone is suffering from CO poisoning, it is important 
to immediately remove that person from the source of the CO and call 911 
for immediate medical attention. If you are in a vehicle, turn off the engine, 
get out of the vehicle as soon as it is safe to do so and try to get the victim to 
breathe fresh air while you wait for help.
Starting a Parked Car
Before getting into a vehicle, look both behind it and in front of it. There 
are blind spots once a motorist is behind the wheel. Children may be there. 
There also may be bottles, cans, bicycles, or other things that cannot be seen 
from the driver’s seat. 
STARTING CHECKLIST
• • All windows should be clean, and nothing should block a motorist’s 
vision. 
Page  
48
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY
AREA OF 
FORWARD 
VISION
AREA OF 
REAR VIEW 
MIRROR 
VISIONBLIND 
AREABLIND 
AREA
RIGHT 
SIDE 
MIRRORLEFT 
SIDE 
MIRROR
Blind spots 
while driving
• • The seat must be adjusted so a motorist can reach all pedals and controls 
easily. (For most motorists, the seat may be adjusted so he/she is sitting 
an arm’s length from the steering wheel).
• • Inside and outside rearview mirrors should be adjusted.
• • Seat belts and shoulder harnesses should be fastened so that they are 
firm and comfortable.
• • The vehicle should be in park or neutral gear and the parking brake 
should be set.
• • Doors should be locked.
A motorist should keep good posture while driving. The seat should be 
adjusted so that the motorist can reach the foot pedals easily. The motorist 
should be comfortable behind the wheel. He/she should not have to strain 
to reach the gearshift levels, turn signals or dashboard controls. A motorist is 
properly positioned when he/she can see clearly and can glance to the rear.
If a motorist wears glasses, he/she should adjust them. More than 95 percent 
of the information a motorist needs is visual. To fight glare at night, colored 
lenses should be avoided as they distort color. Anti-reflective coatings should 
be used on lenses.
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITYPage  
49
This will help eliminate internal reflections in eyeglasses and may help 
night driving. A motorist should have an eye checkup every two years. As 
a motorist ages, visual clarity declines and peripheral vision becomes less 
distinct. For example, a 60-year-old perceives light about a third as well as a 
20-year-old.
Inside and outside mirrors should be adjusted to reduce blind spots. These 
are areas where a motorist cannot see behind his/her vehicle (on both sides) 
through the mirror. A motorist can check this by turning his/her head. The 
outside mirror should be adjusted so that the motorist can see the tip of the 
driver-side front door handle in the lower right of the mirror. This will allow 
the motorist to see part of the lanes of traffic to the left and rear the vehicle.
After starting the engine, a motorist should make sure his/her path is clear by 
turning and looking back. A motorist should not depend on rearview mirrors. 
A motorist must also be sure to check for pedestrians and less conspicuous 
vehicles, such as bicycles and mopeds. A motorist should give the proper 
signal and drive with caution.
When on the road, a motorist can check the vehicle’s mirrors by letting 
a vehicle pass on the left. As the passing vehicle disappears from the 
inside rear view mirror, a motorist should be able to see its front bumper 
in the outside rear view mirror.
IDLING YOUR VEHICLE
New Jersey law requires all motorists to restrict vehicle idling to three 
minutes or less. (N.J.A.C. 7:27-15.8)
Idling more than three minutes is unnecessary and harmful to your vehicle 
and your health. Vehicle and property owners face fines of $250 to $1,000 for 
each violation of this law. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-70.2)
There are some specific situations in which a vehicle may idle for an extend -
ed time, such as when stuck in traffic, or at drive-thru establishments. See 
www.StopTheSoot.org  for a complete listing of exemptions.
So do not forget: Idling stinks and it’s against the law – turn the key and be 
idle free!
Page  
50
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY
Steering
HAND POSITION
A motorist’s grip on the steering wheel is important. The steering wheel can 
be thought of as the face of a clock. For normal driving, a motorist should 
grip the steering wheel by the outside rim at the 9 and 3 o’clock positions, 
keeping his/her thumbs along the face of the wheel. Gripping the steering 
wheel as described diminishes the risk of hand, wrist, or arm injury if the air 
bag is deployed. A motorist should never turn the wheel while gripping it 
from the inside of the rim, hand facing inward. The steering wheel should 
be held firmly but not too tight, as steady as possible as the vehicle’s speed 
increases. Both hands should always be kept on the wheel, except when 
shifting gears or giving hand signals. 
The motorist should keep the vehicle in the center of the lane that it is 
traveling. On a two-lane road with traffic coming toward the vehicle, the 
motorist should keep to the right. Once a motorist feels how the vehicle 
reacts to steering, he/she will be ready to practice turning, parking and 
other movements.
It takes practice to get the feel of steering. If the vehicle has anti-lock brakes 
(ABS), the motorist should never violently jerk the steering wheel while brak -
ing. (See previous section, “Brakes” and following section, “Proper Braking.”)
HAND-OVER-HAND STEERING
Hand-over-hand steering permits a motorist to make steering adjustments 
ranging from very minor up to a half turn of the wheel, while keeping 
both hands on the wheel. If turning through a slight curve, both hands 
will typically retain their original grip on the wheel, making only slight 
finger or wrist adjustments as necessary to maintain the path of travel. 
However, when moving through a turn, the hands may move as much as 
165 degrees. The motorist initiates the turn by pushing the wheel up from 
3 9101112
1
2
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITYPage  
51
the 9 or 3 o’clock position toward 12 o’clock, and the opposite hand crosses 
over and down to the 9 or 3 o’clock position, as appropriate to provide input 
or to stabilize steering. The original hand then returns to the original start 
position of 9 or 3 o’clock. The process is reversed to return to a straight path, 
or the wheel can be allowed to slip through the fingers (controlled slipping) 
to straighten when coming out of a turn, while both hands are always on 
the wheel to adjust as necessary. Hand-over-hand steering is particularly 
well suited for precision maneuvers, steering through curves, intersection 
entry and exit, and skid recovery.
Stopping Distances
There is no simple way to tell exactly how long it will take a vehicle to stop at 
a certain speed. Stopping distance depends on:
• • Motorist reaction time
• • Weather and visibility conditions
• • Vehicle weight
• • Brake conditions
• • Condition and type of tires
• • Roadway conditions
• • Speed
One point is sure: The faster a vehicle is going, the longer it will take it 
to stop. When a motorist must stop quickly, speed can be the difference 
between life and death.
Page  
52
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY
SPEEDREACTION 
DISTANCEBRAKING 
DISTANCE TOTAL
10 mph 11 ft 8 ft 19 ft
20 mph 22 ft 31 ft 53 ft
30 mph 33 ft 69 ft 102 ft
40 mph 44 ft 123 ft 167 ft
50 mph 55 ft 192 ft 247 ft
60 mph 66 ft 277 ft 343 ft
70 mph 77 ft 376 ft 453 ft
A vehicle travels 88 feet per second at 60 mph. Most motorists under most 
traffic conditions have a typical reaction time of ¾ second. Deceleration 
is approximately 14 feet per second. See chapter 4 for more information 
on stopping and chapter 5 for information about following distances and 
stopping at night.
Proper Braking
The use of brakes may seem simple, but it is not. A motorist should know the 
type of braking system that his/her vehicle uses. It could be a conventional 
drum and disc brake system or an anti-lock braking system (ABS). Whether 
the vehicle is front, or rear-wheel drive does not determine proper braking.
Many new motorists make the common mistake of slamming on the 
brake pedal, even if there is no emergency. The vehicle will jerk to a stop 
quickly and wear out brakes and tires. Steady, gentle pressure should 
be applied to the brake to bring the vehicle to a controlled stop. With an 
ABS, a motorist should not pump the brakes or violently jerk the wheel. 
An ABS-equipped vehicle may lose control at only 35 mph if a motorist 
violently jerks the steering wheel and brakes, even on dry pavement. New 
motorists should practice hard braking and steering in an empty parking 
lot or similar open space until they are accustomed to the ABS. A motorist 
should always use his/her right foot for both the brake and the gas pedal. 
If the vehicle is equipped with a manual transmission, the left foot should 
be used for the clutch.
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITYPage  
53
Driving Signals
A motorist should always give a proper signal when turning, changing lanes, 
stopping, or slowing down. A motorist should always use the vehicle’s turn 
signals. A motorist should put on the turn signal at least 100 feet before 
turning and be sure to cancel the signal after making a turn. Not doing so 
could mislead other motorists. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-126)
New Jersey law requires a motorist to know the correct hand signals for 
stopping and turning, which are standard in all states. To give a hand signal, 
a motorist should put his/her arm well out of the vehicle so that it is visible to 
other motorists.
• • Stop or slowing down: hand and arm downward, palm facing to the 
rear.
• • Right turn: hand and arm upward.
• • Left turn: hand and arm straight out.
Another signal is the horn, which is a warning signal. It calls attention to 
what the motorist is doing. Motorists may sound the horn when passing 
another vehicle when not in a business or residential zone. Under normal 
conditions, the horn should be able to be heard for at least 200 feet. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:3-69) Only emergency vehicles may use sirens, whistles, or bells.
Bicyclists, skateboarders, and inline skaters also use the hand signals 
noted above. In addition, instead of extending the left hand and arm 
upward to indicate a right turn, bicyclists, skateboarders, and inline 
skaters may extend the right hand and arm straight out to indicate a right 
turn.
Driving in Reverse
Before driving in reverse, a motorist must be sure that the path is clear. This 
can be done by using the mirrors and turning to check. He/she must be 
incredibly careful because the view to the rear is limited. In reverse, turning 
the wheel to the right will direct the vehicle to the right. Steering to the left 
will direct the vehicle to the left. If a motorist does not turn the wheel while in 
reverse, the vehicle will move straight backward.
Page  
54
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY
To drive in reverse, a motorist’s head and body should be turned to the right 
until he/she can see clearly through the back window of the vehicle without 
the use of mirrors. The motorist’s right hand and arm should be placed over 
the back of the front passenger seat; the left hand should grasp the top of 
the steering wheel.
This is the position a motorist should be in to reverse in a straight line, 
with corrections made as needed. A vehicle should be driven slowly in 
reverse – typically, walking speed (2 to 4 mph). 
The motorist should not turn forward until the vehicle is totally stopped.
If a motorist must turn the wheel while reversing other than in a straight 
line (e.g., parallel parking), two hands must be on the wheel to steer, while a 
motorist’s head and body is turned to look out the rear window. Palming the 
wheel with one hand while turning in reverse is dangerous and can result 
in failing the road test. A motorist should always remember that the front of 
the vehicle will swing in the opposite direction of a turn. A vehicle should be 
driven slowly in reverse.
A motorist must be able to drive in reverse to pass the road portion of the 
driving test. He/she will be asked to back the vehicle about 100 feet in a 
straight line, slowly and smoothly.
Note : As of August 31, 2016, backup cameras and parking sensors that 
have been installed on a motor vehicle are permitted to be used during the 
road test. However, driving in reverse principles apply first and foremost.
Turning
To make safe turns, a motorist should decide well in advance, where he/she 
wants to turn. Last-minute turns can be unsafe. State law requires a motorist 
to move to the proper lane and signal at least 100 feet before making any 
turn. The faster the traffic is moving, the sooner a motorist should plan his/
her turn. If a turn is missed, a motorist should never back up. It is better to 
take the next turn than to risk a crash. Before turning, a motorist should 
always:
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITYPage  
55
• • Use the mirrors to look behind and to both sides for other vehicles (or 
people) to see if it is safe to turn.
• • Check for less visible vehicles, such as motorcycles, bicycles, and mopeds.
• • Signal first (use turn signals or hand signals) and then move into the 
proper lane.
• • Slow down before reaching an intersection.
• • Keep a steady speed and follow pavement markings.
• • Always stay in the same lane until the turn is finished.
• • Make sure the turn signal is turned off after the turn is completed.
 
THE 3-POINT TURN (K-TURN)
When turning a vehicle around, a motorist should start from the right edge 
of the road. Choose a safe spot with good visibility in both directions. If there 
is no other traffic, the motorist should signal left and move forward slowly 
while turning the steering wheel to the left. The vehicle should be stopped 
several inches from the left curb or street edge. The motorist should then 
back up slowly while turning the steering wheel to the right, stopping several 
inches from the right curb or street edge. The motorist should next move 
the vehicle forward while turning the steering wheel to the left. Finally, the 
motorist should straighten the vehicle’s wheels as it faces in the direction, 
he/she wants to go. This is a complete 3-Point (or K) Turn. A new motorist will 
be required to make this turn during the MVC’s road test.
 
3
2
1
Page  
56
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY
Parking
When parking, a motorist should always set the brake and put the vehicle in 
park or, with a manual transmission, in reverse or low gear. There are several 
important steps for a motorist to follow when parking his/her vehicle on a 
street with a curb:
• • When parking a vehicle facing downhill:  
The hand brake should be set, and the vehicle’s wheels should be turned 
toward the curb. The vehicle should be in park or, with a manual transmis -
sion, in reverse.
• • When parking a vehicle facing uphill:  
The hand brake should be set, and the vehicle’s wheels should be 
turned away from the curb. The vehicle should be in park or, with a 
manual transmission, in low.
ANGLE PARKING
Angle parking is often used in parking lots of shopping centers and some -
times at curbs.
A motorist should follow these rules when entering an angle parking space 
to his/her right:
• • Watch for traffic both ahead and behind.
• • Signal and begin to slow down.
• • Make sure the rear of the vehicle will clear the parked vehicles.
• • Steer sharply into the parking space, and then straighten the wheels 
centering the vehicle in the parking space.
• • Shift to park, or reverse if standard transmission, and apply the parking 
brake.
A motorist should follow these rules before backing out of an angle parking 
space:
• • Walk around to make sure nothing is in the vehicle’s way.
• • Slowly move the vehicle in reverse and be sure that the lane is clear of 
traffic.
• • Tap the horn to warn nearby pedestrians.
• • When able to see past the tops of the vehicles parked next to the vehicle, 
stop, and look again.
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITYPage  
57
• • Look back and to each side for other motorists.
• • Remember that the front of the vehicle will swing opposite of the direc -
tion of the turn.
• • Back up slowly while turning until the vehicle’s left front wheel passes the 
rear bumper of the vehicle parked on the left.
• • Straighten the wheels as the vehicle comes back into the lane of traffic.
PARALLEL PARKING
Parallel parking is the most common type of parking on city streets. A 
motorist must be able to parallel park a vehicle to pass the MVC’s road test. 
This takes the most practice for a new motorist. A motorist should practice 
often, in an empty parking lot at first. Flags or markers 25 feet apart may be 
used to show where the other vehicles would be. If a motorist hits the flags 
or markers, he/she is not ready for parking between real vehicles and should 
keep practicing. The slower and smoother a motorist backs into a parking 
space, the easier it is to park. To properly parallel park, a motorist should:
• • Find a parking space that is large enough to fit the vehicle.
• • Signal for a stop and signal to the right to alert motorists that the vehicle 
will back up to the right.
• • Pull up alongside (parallel) about two to four feet from the vehicle in front.
• • Turn and check to see that the way is clear behind the vehicle before 
backing up.
• • Turn his/her body to look out the rear window of the vehicle. Begin 
backing up slowly for about two feet and turn the steering wheel all the 
way to the right.
• • When the front of the vehicle has cleared the rear bumper of the vehicle 
in front, stop and check the angle.
• • Make sure the right back wheel has not hit the curb.
• • Turn the steering wheel all the way to the left while beginning to back up 
slowly.
• • Make sure the vehicle can clear its back bumper.
• • When the vehicle is in line, stop. Be sure not to hit the vehicle in back.
• • Turn the vehicle’s wheels straight, and drive to the center of the parking 
space. The vehicle’s tires should be no more than six inches from the curb.
Page  
58
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY
6”
DRIVER RESPONSIBILITYPage  
59
4
Safe Driving Rules  
and Regulations
Page  
60
SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONSPage  
61
Section Contents
62 Speed Control
64 Passing
65 Keeping to the Right
65 Yielding the Right-of-Way
66 Pedestrians in a Crosswalk
67 Intersections
68 Entering Highways, Parkways, and Turnpikes
69 Leaving Highways, Parkways, and Turnpikes
70 Special Highway, Parkway, and Turnpike Conditions
72 Curves
72 Interchanges
72 Turning Regulations
74 Stopping Regulations
82 Using Headlights
83 Parking Regulations
84 Cellular Telephones
86 Littering
Page  
62 SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
Motorists pay double fines for 
exceeding the 65 mph limit by 10 
miles per hour or more. Double fines 
also apply to most other moving 
violations committed in a 65 mph 
zone. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-98.6)Speed Control
Exceeding the speed limit is a common contributing factor of fatal and other 
types of crashes. A motorist must always obey the speed limit. Speed affects 
almost everything that can happen when driving. A good rule is to keep up 
with the flow of traffic at any legal speed. To make safe emergency stops 
when necessary, it is important to keep enough distance from surrounding 
traffic. New Jersey law sets top speed limits for any given road, street, 
highway, or freeway.
25 mph 
School zones, business, or  
residential districts
35 mph 
Suburban business and  
residential districts
50 mph 
Non-posted rural roadways
55 mph 
Certain state highways  
(as posted) and interstates
65 mph 
Certain interstate  
highways (as posted)
NEW JERSEY LIMITS (UNLESS OTHERWISE POSTED) 
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-98)
Never drive faster than weather, road, or other conditions safely allow, 
regardless of the posted speed limit. A motorist should judge his/her speed 
control by existing conditions. A motorist should slow down enough to be 
able to see clearly and stop quickly in traffic. Failure to do so can result in a 
moving violation. 
Always slow down:
• • On narrow or winding roads.
• • At intersections or railroad crossings.
• • On hills.
• • At sharp or blind curves.
• • Where there are pedestrians or driving hazards.
• • When the road is wet or slippery.
If vehicle problems prevent a motorist from keeping up with the normal flow 
of traffic, he/she should pull off the road and activate hazard lights.
DRIVING TOO SLOWLY
A motorist should always try to keep up with the normal flow of traffic, while 
not exceeding the posted speed limit. Some crashes are caused by driving 
too slowly and backing up traffic. When road surfaces and traffic are normal, 
New Jersey law prohibits blocking traffic through slow driving. (N.J.S.A. 
39:4-56)
SAFE CORRIDORS (N.J.S.A. 39:4-203.5)
To improve highway safety, New Jersey initiated the Safe Corridors Program, 
which was signed into law in July 2003. The Safe Corridors law doubles 
fines on various state highways for a variety of driving offenses, including 
speeding and aggressive driving. Highways are designated as safe corridors 
based on statistics showing crash rates 50 percent over the state rate and 
1,000 or more crashes reported over a three-year period. The Commissioner 
of Transportation has the authority to designate safe corridors as necessary, 
as well as to remove those that show improved safety levels. A current list 
of Safe Corridor highways is available on the New Jersey Department of 
Transportation website at www.nj.gov/transportation . 
SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONSPage  
63
Passing
A motorist must know the proper lane for normal driving and how to change 
lanes safely. The rules for passing depend on the type of road. Stay to the 
right of the roadway’s center lines. Passing is only safe when there is no 
oncoming traffic.
Watch for the following lane markings: (N.J.S.A. 39:4-86)
• • Both center lines are solid: No passing allowed.
• • One center line is broken: Passing is allowed only on the side with the 
broken line.
• • Both center lines are broken: Passing is allowed on both sides.
Note: All passing must be completed before the center lines are solid again.
PASS ONLY WH EN SAFE
PASS
When line is broken
DO NOT PASS
When line is solid
NO PASSING
With double solid lines
Page  
64 SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
Most passing should be on the left. Passing on the right is allowed only on 
roads with more than one lane going in the same direction, if vehicles on 
the roadway are moving in two or more substantially continuous lines or 
when the motorist ahead is making a left turn and there is room to pass. 
Never pass on the right shoulder of the road. This is against the law. (N.J.S.A. 
39:4-85)
A motorist should not pass:
• • On a hill or curve or at any time he/she cannot see far enough ahead.
• • At a street crossing or intersection.
• • At a railroad crossing.
• • On narrow bridges or in underpasses or tunnels.
• • When a sign prohibits passing or center lines restrict passing.
• • When behind a vehicle that has stopped to let a pedestrian cross.
Keeping to the Right
New Jersey law requires motorists to keep to the right, except when passing. 
Motorists must drive on the right half of the roadway unless driving on a 
one-way street. Motorists must drive a vehicle as close as possible to the 
right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing 
another vehicle. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-82)
On a multi-lane roadway, motorists must drive in the lane nearest to the right-
hand edge or curb of the roadway when the lane is available for travel, except 
when overtaking another vehicle or in preparation for a left turn. (N.J.S.A. 
39:4-88)
Yielding the Right-of-Way
Although laws govern the right-of-way, a motorist should always be prepared 
to yield. These basic rules always apply:
• • Emergency vehicles  
When police cars, fire engines, and ambulances are giving warning signs 
(sirens, flashing lights).
• • Trains  
When a train is approaching a railroad crossing.
• • Buses  
When re-entering the flow of traffic.
SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONSPage  
65
• • Postal vehicles  
When the vehicle re-enters the flow of traffic.
• • Motorized or mobility-assistance devices  
When in a crosswalk or seeking to cross a road.
• • Other vehicles  
That are already in the intersection.
Pedestrians in a Crosswalk
New Jersey has experienced many pedestrian injury crashes and fatalities, 
as compared to the nation as a whole. The most important pedestrian safety 
message for New Jersey residents is: Pedestrian safety is a shared responsi -
bility. There is no single cause of crashes involving pedestrians. Pedestrians 
and motorists must all do their part to keep pedestrians safe.
A motorist must:
• • Stop for pedestrians in crosswalks. Failure to stop carries a fine of up to 
$500, up to 25 days in jail, community service, a driving privilege suspen -
sion of up to 6 months, and 2 points. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-36)
• • Watch for pedestrians when turning on red.
• • Obey speed limits.
• • Be sure not to block or park in crosswalks.
• • Keep the vehicle’s windshield clean for maximum visibility.
• • Always be alert for pedestrians.
• • Be aware of areas where pedestrians are most likely to appear (near 
schools, town centers, residential neighborhoods, parks).
• • Never pass another vehicle that has stopped for a pedestrian.
• • Stop for all pedestrians in a crosswalk even if they began crossing with a 
proper signal and they are still in the crosswalk when the signal changes.
• • Remember that pedestrians are the most vulnerable roadway users. 
Motorists will be held responsible for maintaining pedestrian safety.
Page  
66 SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
Intersections
An intersection is where two or more roads cross or merge at angles. As 
most crashes occur at intersections, a motorist should be aware of the four 
types of intersections and know how to safely navigate through them. A 
single solid white line across a road at an intersection means that a motorist 
must stop behind the line for a traffic signal or sign.
CONTROLLED
An intersection is controlled if there are traffic signals or signs in any direc -
tion or controlled by a police officer. A motorist must obey the signals and 
signs. At a controlled intersection, a motorist must yield for certain condi -
tions. At a multi-way stop or stop intersection, a motorist must yield to the 
motorist on the right if both motorists get there at the same time. A motorist 
should also yield to another motorist already stopped at the intersection. At 
an intersection controlled by a yield sign, a motorist must slow down and 
yield to traffic on the intersecting roadway, even if he/she must stop. When 
making a left turn at an intersection, a motorist must yield to oncoming 
traffic and stop for pedestrians within the crosswalk.
A motorist is prohibited from entering or crossing an intersecting street 
marked with a stop sign unless he or she first brings the vehicle to a 
complete stop at a point within five feet of the nearest crosswalk or stop line 
marked upon the pavement at the near side of the intersection street. The 
motorist may only proceed after yielding the right-of-way to all traffic on the 
intersection street, which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
Note: Driving on private property to avoid a traffic signal or sign is a 
motor vehicle violation. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-66.2)
UNCONTROLLED
An intersection is uncontrolled when two or more roads join and there 
is no traffic signal or regulatory device. A motorist must be careful when 
approaching these types of intersections. Most of the time there will be 
a warning sign prior to reaching the intersection. As a motorist nears a 
crossroad that is not controlled, he/she must reduce speed and be ready to 
stop if any traffic is coming from the right or left. A motorist coming from a 
private road or driveway must yield to all traffic on the main road. As a rule, 
the vehicle on the left should yield to the vehicle on the right. When a traffic 
signal is not illuminated because of a power failure or other malfunction; the 
traffic signal is observed as a 4-way stop signal. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-81)
SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONSPage  
67
BLIND LINE OF SIGHT
Buildings, parked vehicles, or bushes may obstruct a motorist’s line of sight. 
On rural roadways, trees or crops may obstruct a motorist’s line of sight. A 
motorist should always slow down or stop completely to make sure there is 
no cross traffic before proceeding.
TRAFFIC CIRCLE
There are no set rules for driving into, around and out of a traffic circle in 
New Jersey. Common sense and caution must always prevail. In most cases, 
the circle’s historically established traffic flow pattern dictates who has the 
right-of-way. If a major highway flows into and through the circle, it usually 
dominates the traffic flow pattern and commands the right-of-way. Traffic 
control signs, such as stop or yield signs, at the entrances to the circle also 
govern which motorist has the right-of-way. Never enter a traffic circle 
without checking all signs and determining the intentions of the motorists 
already moving within the circle.
Whenever a motorist is in doubt concerning who has the right-of-way in a 
circle, he/ she should exercise extreme caution and remember the basic rule 
governing any uncontrolled intersection: The vehicle to the left yields the 
right-of-way to the vehicle approaching from the right.
Entering Highways, Parkways, and Turnpikes
Highways, parkways, and turnpikes are high-speed (up to 65 mph) divided 
roadways and generally have multiple lanes. Traffic on each side of the divide 
will travel in only one direction. There are no direct intersections. Motorists 
enter these roadways by way of acceleration lanes, which are extra lanes at 
highway entrances used by motorists to speed up to join the flow of traffic. 
A motorist must yield to traffic already traveling on the main road before 
moving into the proper lane.
Page  
68 SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
Use turn signal
Speed up to the 
flow of traffic
Keep the following points in mind when entering a highway, parkway, or 
turnpike:
• • Obey posted advisory speed limits (if any) at the entrance ramp.
• • Speed up to the flow of traffic when leaving the acceleration lane.
• • Avoid coming to a complete stop in the acceleration lane.
• • Yield to traffic and enter the right-hand lane when safe.
Leaving Highways, Parkways, and Turnpikes
In most cases, exit ramps or deceleration lanes, which are extra lanes 
at a highway exit, are located on the right-hand side of the roadway. 
A motorist should always watch for signs that direct where to exit the 
roadway. If a motorist misses an exit ramp on a highway, parkway, or 
turnpike, he/she should go to the next exit.
Keep the following points in mind when leaving a highway, parkway, or 
turnpike:
• • Start slowing down when entering a deceleration lane.
• • Obey the posted advisory speed limit of the deceleration lane.
SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONSPage  
69
Use turn signal
Slow to speed 
limit of exit laneAvoid stopping in the 
entry and exit lanes
• • When the exit is located on the left of a roadway, look for signs that will 
direct traffic to the proper lane for exiting.
• • If you miss an exit, go on to the next one.
• • Never back up on an exit ramp or deceleration lane.
Special Highway, Parkway, and Turnpike Conditions
WEAVE LANE
A weave lane is both an entrance and an exit for an expressway. Traffic may 
come onto and leave the expressway at the same location. This traffic weave 
causes conflicts, both for motorists using a weave lane and those on the 
expressway and entrance ramp (in terms of speed and space adjustments). 
The motorist entering from the entrance ramp must yield the right-of-way to 
the motorist leaving the expressway.
Page  
70 SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
HIGHWAYS THROUGH CITIES
The volume of traffic may increase dramatically. Speeds may slow to a crawl. 
The motorist should drive in the left or center lane to avoid merge conflicts 
during rush hour. A motorist should search for exits early and adjust position 
for exit.
DISABLED VEHICLES
When seeing a disabled vehicle ahead, a motorist should reduce speed and 
increase the space between his/her vehicle and the disabled vehicle. This 
may involve changing lanes. Be alert for pedestrians, tow trucks, and/or 
police vehicles. (See New Jersey’s “Move Over” law later in this chapter.)
If a motorist’s vehicle becomes disabled, he/she must:
• • Pull off as far as possible onto the shoulder or median.
• • Turn on emergency flashers.
• • Raise the hood to signal for assistance.
• • Stay in the vehicle, keep your seatbelt on and lock the doors.
• • If available, use a cell phone to call for help.
• • Ask anyone who stops to go to a phone and call for assistance.
• • Do not get into a stranger’s vehicle.
CONSTRUCTION AREAS
A motorist should always stay alert for construction-area warning signs. 
When coming across these areas, a motorist should adjust speed and adjust 
position to maintain space around his/her vehicle.
TOLL BOOTHS
A motorist should stay alert for toll booth signs and begin reducing speed 
early, as traffic may be backed up at the booth. Green lights or signals high -
light open booths. A motorist should be aware of EZ Pass booths and lanes, 
including high speed EZ Pass lanes. When exiting toll booths, a motorist 
should search traffic to both sides for merging potential, accelerate smoothly 
and adjust speed.
SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONSPage  
71
Curves
It is important for a motorist to adjust steering and speed when approaching 
a curve in the road. The best way to enter a curve is to slow down before 
entering and avoid drifting into another lane. A motorist should always watch 
for vehicles that may drift into his/her lane as well. Check for Curve Ahead 
warning signs and recommended speeds.
Interchanges
Divided roadways are built for express traffic. To ease traffic flow, there 
are usually no traffic lights or direct intersections. To enter or exit such an 
expressway, a cloverleaf turn is often necessary. A motorist should watch 
for entrance and exit signs and drive slowly in the circle, obeying the posted 
speed limit.
Turning Regulations
RIGHT TURN ON RED
Unless a No Turn on Red sign is posted, New Jersey law authorizes a right 
turn on a red light after a motorist comes to a full stop and checks for traffic. 
A motorist must yield to all oncoming traffic and pedestrians before turning 
right at a red light. Difficult-to-see vehicles, such as bicycles and mopeds, 
may have a green light, so it is important for a motorist to be aware of their 
presence. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-115) Always use a proper turn signal at least 100 feet 
before making any turn and cancel the signal after completing the turn. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-126)
RIGHT TURNS (N.J.S.A. 39:4-123)
To make a safe right turn, a motorist should approach the intersection as 
far to the right as possible, keeping near to the curb or parked vehicles. The 
motorist should not swing outward or into another lane while making the 
right turn. He/she should drive up to the turn as far to the right as possible, 
keeping close to the right curb or parked vehicles at the curb. Proper 
vehicle positioning prior to a right turn reduces the chance of another 
vehicle being in the space on the right as the motorist makes the turn.                   
He/she should not swing into the wrong lane while making the turn.
Page  
72 SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
Use turn signal
SLOW DOWNUse turn signal
DO NOT CROSS 
DIVIDING LINE
LEFT TURNS (N.J.S.A. 39:4-123) 
Left turns, two vehicles: When two vehicles meet at an intersection and 
both have signaled to turn left, extra caution must be applied. When safe, 
each motorist should turn to the left of the center of the intersection.
Left turn from a one-way road on to a one-way road: Approaching the 
turn in the left lane, the motorist should turn into the left lane of the road   
he/she is entering.
Left turn from a two-way road onto a two-way road: Approach the turn as 
close as possible to the line nearest to the center of the road. When turning, 
the vehicle should not cross lane markings. The motorist should keep to the 
right of the center line of the road that the vehicle is entering.
Left turns, between intersections: Between intersections, solid lines show 
when not to pass. However, these lines may be crossed with care when 
entering or leaving driveways in business or residential areas.
Left turn from a two-way road onto a four-lane highway: Approach the 
turn as close to the center line to the right side of the road as possible. Make 
the turn before reaching the center of the intersection.
It is important not to cross lane markings. The motorist should turn into the 
lane nearest the center line of the right side of the other road. This is the 
passing lane of the four-lane highway. When traffic permits, the motorist 
should move to the right, out of the passing lane.
SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONSPage  
73
Use turn signal
Yield to  
oncoming trafficUse turn signal
Don’t cut 
corners
Stopping Regulations
Signs, signals, and traffic rules indicate when a motorist must stop. A 
motorist must be careful when traveling through an intersection and exer -
cise caution when proceeding from a red light after the light turns green. 
There may be other vehicles coming through or still in the intersection. 
Most crashes at traffic signals happen in the first few seconds after the 
light has changed. When a yellow light follows a green light, a motorist 
must stop before entering the intersection, unless yellow appears when 
the vehicle is too close to stop safely. If the light changes while a driver is 
already in the intersection, he/ she should go through with caution. Be alert 
for a stale green light; this is a light that has been green for some time. 
Page  
74 SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
Use turn signal
Yield to oncoming trafficUse turn signal
Don’t turn wide
Be prepared for it to change to yellow and then to red. Slow down and stop 
accordingly.
A motorist must stop:
• • At an intersection with a stop sign.
• • At an intersection with a red light either flashing or illuminated.
• • At an intersection with a yellow light after a green light, unless too close 
to stop safely.
• • When a traffic officer orders the vehicle to stop.
SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONSPage  
75
• • When there is a yield sign and traffic does not permit a safe merge.
• • When a school bus is picking up or letting off children and/or the red 
lights are flashing.
• • When coming from an alley, private driveway, or building.
• • At a bridge span that is about to open for boat traffic.
• • For a blind pedestrian using a white or metallic walking cane, or a trained 
guide dog, or a guide dog instructor engaged in instructing a guide dog.
• • For a pedestrian in a crosswalk or at an intersection.
• • For a motorized wheelchair or mobility-assistance device in a crosswalk or 
at an intersection.
Single white lines show motorists where to stop at stop signs or traffic 
signals.
STOP AT RAILROAD CROSSINGS
To ensure public safety, the New Jersey Department of Transportation 
(NJDOT) and railroads mark public highway rail-grade crossings, also 
known as railroad crossings with one or more warning devices. Warning 
devices include advance-warning signs, pavement markings in front of a 
railroad crossing’s flashing red lights (usually on railroad crossing signs), 
gates or gates with flashing red lights, ringing bells, and flag signals. 
A motorist must stop at least 15 feet from a railroad crossing when there 
are flashing red lights, ringing bells, descending or lowered gates, or flag 
signals. Flashing red lights, ringing bells, descending gates or gates that 
have already been lowered indicate that a train is coming, and a motorist 
must stop. A motorist should never cross until the gates have been raised, 
the bells have stopped ringing and the red lights have stopped flashing. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-127.1) Never race a train. A motorist can underestimate the 
speed and distance of trains. Most trains need more than a mile to stop if 
traveling at 60 mph or more.
Special Circumstances:
Some vehicles, such as school buses, buses, or vehicles carrying hazardous 
materials must always stop at railroad crossings. When driving behind one 
of these vehicles, a motorist must be prepared to stop, even if the signals do 
not indicate a train is coming. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-128)
A motorist should never stop his/her vehicle on railroad tracks. When 
crossings railroad tracks, a motorist should make sure there is room on 
the other side to get completely across. If warning devices activate while a 
motorist is crossing railroad tracks, he/she should immediately proceed to 
the other side.
Page  
76 SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
STOP FOR SCHOOL BUSES (N.J.S.A. 39:4-128.1)
A motorist must stop for a school bus with flashing red lights. State law 
requires a motorist to stop at least 25 feet away if he/she is traveling on a 
two-lane road or on a multi-lane highway where lanes are only separated 
by lines, or on a privately maintained road. When traveling on a dual-lane 
highway, a motorist should slow to 10 mph if on the other side of a safety 
island or raised median. School buses are equipped with yellow (or amber) 
and red flashing lights. The yellow (or amber) lights go on before the bus 
stops and the red lights go on when the bus has stopped. However, a 
motorist should not depend on these lights, if driving behind a school bus. 
They could be malfunctioning.
When a school bus stops, all motorists traveling behind or approaching the 
bus must stop their vehicles at least 25 feet away. A motorist should only 
proceed after the bus signals have been turned off and even then, he/she 
must watch for children or persons who have developmental disabilities.
If a school bus has stopped directly in front of a school to pick up or let off 
children or persons with developmental disabilities, a motorist may pass 
from either direction at a speed of no more than 10 mph.
25 Feet25 Feet
Cars must stop 
25 feet from 
school buses
SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONSPage  
77
STOP FOR FROZEN DESSERT TRUCKS (N.J.S.A. 39:4-128.4)
When approaching or overtaking an ice cream or frozen dessert truck from 
either direction, and the truck is flashing red lights and posting a stop signal 
arm, a motorist must:
• • Yield the right-of-way to any person who is crossing the roadway to or 
from the truck.
• • Watch out for children and be prepared to stop.
• • Stop, and then drive past the truck at a speed of no more than 15 mph.
• • A motorist needs not stop on a dual highway if he/she is on the other side 
of a safety island or raised median.
PULL OVER AND STOP FOR EMERGENCY VEHICLES
New Jersey law requires all motorists to yield to emergency vehicles when 
emergency vehicles sound sirens and/or flashing red and/or blue emergency 
lights. A motorist should steer to the extreme right of the roadway, stop, and 
wait for the emergency vehicle to pass. Afterward, the motorist should keep 
at least 300 feet behind a signaling emergency vehicle. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-92)
Police cars, fire trucks, ambulances or other emergency vehicles have sirens 
and red lights. Private vehicles operated by volunteer fire and rescue squad 
members (with emergency vehicle identification) responding to an emer -
gency call use blue lights. A motorist should never park within 200 feet of a 
fire department vehicle in service or drive over a fire hose unless directed to 
do so by a fire, emergency rescue or police official.
MOVE OVER LAW
New Jersey’s “Move Over” law requires all motorists approaching a stationary, 
authorized emergency vehicle, tow truck, highway maintenance, other emer -
gency service vehicle that is displaying a flashing, blinking or alternating 
red, blue, amber or yellow light, or a configuration of lights containing one 
of these colors, or a disabled vehicle that is flashing hazard warning signal 
lights or utilizing road flares or reflective triangles, to change lanes, safety 
and traffic conditions permitting, into a lane not adjacent to the stationary 
emergency or disabled vehicle. If a lane change is impossible, prohibited 
by law or unsafe, the motorist must reduce the speed of his/her vehicle to a 
reasonable and proper speed that is lower than the posted speed limit and 
be prepared to stop, if necessary. Motorists who violate this law face a fine of 
not less than $100 and not more than $500. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-92.2) Additionally, 
motorists convicted of three or more offenses may be subject to motor 
vehicle penalty points. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-30.5) 
 
Page  
78 SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
Page  
79
 
Page  
80
MESSAGE FROM THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
For many people, being pulled over by a Police Officer while 
driving a vehicle can be a stressful event. In order to make the 
traffic stop as safe and pleasant as possible for all involved, here 
are some important tips:
• • Pull over in a safe place as soon as possible.
• • Be courteous, mutual respect between the officer and the 
driver is expected and encouraged.
• • Have your license, insurance card and registration in a place 
you can easily access.
• • Turn down your music.
• • If you are stopped at night, turn on your dome and/or interior 
lights. This will increase the visibility inside your vehicle so the 
Officer will be less concerned about what he or she cannot see.
• • Roll down your window.
• • Keep your hands visible, preferably on the steering wheel.
• • Do not make sudden movements, particularly if the move -
ments involve reaching into areas not visible to the Officer. If 
you must reach for something, wait for the Officer to come to 
your vehicle and tell the Officer what you are planning to do 
before you do it.
• • Stay calm and communicate with the Officer.
SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONSPage  
81
Using Headlights
Proper use of headlights is critical to safe driving. Headlights must be used 
between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise. 
Headlights must also be used when visibility is 500 feet or less, when using 
windshield wipers (during rain, snow, and ice) or when encountering fog, 
mist, smoke, or other factors that reduce visibility. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-46)
Being able to see clearly while driving is especially important. A vehicle’s 
lights should always be in good working order and clean. Headlights help 
other motorists see approaching vehicles. Parking or auxiliary lights cannot 
legally be used in place of headlights when headlights are required.
BRIGHT AND DIM
Headlights have two sets of beams: bright (high) and dim (low), which are 
controlled by a switch or button on or near the dashboard. The bright beam 
is for open country driving when there is no traffic in sight. The bright beam 
helps a motorist see farther ahead and peripherally or at a wider angle. At 
night, a motorist’s pupils are dilated, allowing more light to aid in the ability 
to see. Bright beams can momentarily blind other motorists by constricting 
the pupils and should not be used if other vehicles are approaching or 
when driving behind another vehicle. It can take three to five seconds for a 
motorist to recover from the glare of approaching high-beam headlights. 
At a speed of 50 mph, a motorist will have traveled the length of a football 
field while being unable to see. If a vehicle is approaching with high beams, 
a motorist should look to the right of the road until the vehicle passes. Never 
flash high beams at an approaching motorist.
The dim beams are used for city driving and driving in traffic on roadways. Dim 
beams are focused down on the road. Dim beams are used when traveling 
behind other vehicles or when another vehicle is approaching.
OTHER TYPES OF LIGHTS
Parking lights  
Parking lights are to be used for a short period of time, such as when a 
vehicle is left in a permitted zone, to show other motorists where a vehicle 
is parked. Parking lights are required on vehicles parked in areas other than 
business or residential zones.
Page  
82 SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
Taillights  
Taillights turn on at the same time as a vehicle’s headlights and parking 
lights. They become brighter when a motorist applies the brakes to show 
that he/she is slowing or stopping. During the day, without headlights, the 
taillights also turn on as a motorist applies the brakes.
Brake lights   
Brake lights become brighter when a motorist applies the brakes, showing 
that the vehicle is slowing or stopping.
Interim (overhead) lights   
Found inside the vehicle, these types of lights should be used only briefly 
(when necessary) when driving or to comply with a police officer’s request to 
illuminate the motorist’s compartment of the vehicle when stopped.
Dashboard lights  
If dashboard lights are too bright, they may create a glare for the motorist 
and impede vision. The lights should be kept dim but still light enough for 
a motorist to read the dials.
Spotlights   
Spotlights should be used only in emergencies. This also applies to emergen -
cy flashers (hazard lights). Spotlights may not be used for driving purposes.
Fog lights  
These auxiliary driving lights may be used with low-beam headlights 
to provide general lighting ahead of a motor vehicle, specifically during 
foggy weather conditions. (N.J.A.C. 13:20-32.25)
Parking Regulations
A motorist should always check for traffic when leaving a vehicle after 
parking. He/she should also check for bicycles or mopeds, which are some -
times difficult to see, before opening the driver-side door and exiting the 
vehicle. A motorist opening a door into traffic may be liable for any crash with 
a moving vehicle. It is safer for passengers to exit a parked vehicle from the 
curbside. A motorist should read parking signs before parking on a city street 
to be aware of restrictions or time limits. It is illegal for a vehicle to be parked 
more than six inches from the curb. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-135) Never park where a 
vehicle will block traffic.
DO NOT PARK (N.J.S.A. 39:4-138)
Unless directed to do so by a police officer or to avoid a crash, a motorist 
should never stop or park at any of the following places:
SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONSPage  
83
• • In a crosswalk.
• • Between a safety zone for pedestrians and the adjacent curb or within    
20 feet of the end of the safety zone.
• • Near properly marked street construction.
• • In a space on public or private property marked for vehicle parking for 
persons with a disability (unless legally authorized).
• • On an interstate highway.
• • In a sidewalk.
• • In a bus stop zone.
• • In front of a public or private driveway.
• • Within an intersection.
• • Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
• • Within 25 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection or sideline of a street or 
intersection highway, except at alleys.
• • Within 50 feet of a railroad crossing.
• • Within 50 feet of a stop sign.
• • Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and within       
75 feet on the street opposite a fire station entrance.
• • On any bridge or elevated roadway or in any tunnel.
• • Next to another vehicle parked at the curb (double parking).
• • In an area where parking is prohibited by municipal ordinance.
In case of mechanical trouble or other emergency, a motorist should stop on 
the right highway shoulder and turn on emergency flashers.
Cellular Telephones
State law prohibits the use of handheld electronic devices (such as cellular 
telephone) while driving a motor vehicle on any public road or highway. 
Using a handheld cellular telephone or texting device is a primary offense. 
Law enforcement may stop and cite a motorist specifically for these actions. 
Motorists are permitted to use a hands-free cellular telephone if it does 
not interfere with any federally required safety equipment or with the safe 
operation of the vehicle. Although the use of a hands-free cellular telephone 
is legal, it is strongly discouraged. 
Page  
84 SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
A handheld cellular telephone may be used only in certain emergency 
situations, which include:
• • Fire
• • Traffic crash
• • Serious road hazard
• • Medical emergency
• • Hazardous material emergency
Motorists in the above-mentioned circumstances must keep one hand on 
the steering wheel while using a handheld telephone. To prove legal use 
of a handheld telephone while operating a motor vehicle, a motorist may 
be asked to produce testimony or written statements from appropriate 
authorities, or telephone records. The fine for breaking this law is $200-$400 
for a first offense, $400-$600 for a second offense within 10 years of the first 
offense, $600-$800 for a third offense within 10 years of the second offense 
and for all subsequent offenses. A person convicted of a third or subsequent 
violation shall also be assessed three motor vehicle penalty points. (N.J.S.A. 
39:4-97.3) There may be a 90-day license suspension as well.
“Kulesh’s, Kuberts’ and Bolis’ Law,” enacted in 2012, establishes illegal use of a 
cellular telephone while driving as recklessness under the vehicular homicide 
(N.J.S.A. 2C:11-5) and assault by auto (N.J.S.A. 2C-12-1) statutes. The intent and 
effect of this law is to make it easier for prosecutors to obtain convictions for 
vehicular homicide or assault by auto against a person who illegally uses a 
cell phone while driving and, as result, kills or injures someone.
A graduated driver license (GDL) holder may not use a handheld or hands-
free cellular telephone, or any other handheld electronic device, when 
behind the wheel. Doing so is a violation of GDL restrictions. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-13, 
39:3-13.2a, 39:3-13.4)
A school bus driver may not use a handheld or hands-free cellular telephone 
while operating a school bus, except in an emergency or when the school 
bus is parked in a safe area off a highway. (N.J.S.A. 39:3B-25)
SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONSPage  
85
Littering
Throwing trash, debris or rubbish from a moving or parked vehicle is 
illegal. Litter is a safety hazard and an eyesore. Fines of up to $1,000 may be 
imposed on motorists found throwing “dangerous objects” from a vehicle 
onto a roadway. If the vehicle is moving when litter is thrown, the motorist 
may lose his/her license. All trash, debris or rubbish carried in a vehicle must 
be covered to keep it from littering the roadway. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-63, 39:4-64) 
Page  
86 SAFE DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
Page  
87
5
Defensive Driving
Page  
88
DEFENSIVE DRIVINGPage  
89
Section Contents
90 Prevent a Crash
90 Aggressive Driving/Road Rage
92 Distractions
92 Tired Driver/Highway Hypnosis
93 Communicating and Driving
94 Keep a Safe Distance/Do Not Tailgate
95 Following Distances
96 Changing Lanes and Passing
97 Passed by Another Vehicle
97 Road Conditions
99 Reduced Visibility
100 Night Driving
101 Driving Situations
104 Reacting to Driving Problems
107 Vehicle Failure
108 Crashes (Accidents)
110 What to Do in Case of a Crash
Page  
90 DEFENSIVE DRIVING
Prevent a Crash
Most crashes are caused by motorist error. A motorist can reduce the chanc -
es of a crash by knowing and using the standard crash-prevention formula:
Be alert:  
Never think the other motorist will not make a driving mistake.
Be prepared:  
Learn what to do in any situation when you have to act fast, and always 
expect the unexpected.
Act in time:  
Try not to panic. Know what to do if something happens suddenly.
Aggressive Driving/Road Rage
Emotions can greatly affect a motorist’s ability to drive. If a motorist is 
angry or excited, he/she should take time to cool off. Aggressive driving is a 
progression of unlawful driving actions including, but not limited to, unex -
pectedly altering the speed of a vehicle, making improper or erratic traffic 
lane changes, disregarding traffic control devices, failing to yield the right of 
way and following another vehicle too closely.
• • Unexpectedly altering the speed of a vehicle is counterproductive to the 
goal of safely operating a motor vehicle. The speed limit should always 
be obeyed, as failure to do so can result in crashes, injuries, and even 
fatalities. Though some people may assume that it is safer to go slower 
than the other vehicles, it is actually important to keep up with the flow 
of traffic, as doing so helps create a safe environment for all those on the 
road.
• • Making improper and/or erratic traffic lane changes can result in 
crashes, and so, when attempting to change lanes, it is imperative that 
the rear-and side view mirrors are utilized, the turn signals are properly 
and responsibly used, and that ample warning time is provided to other 
drivers in advance of any lane change. Additionally, the vehicle should 
be kept in the center of the lane at all times, as veering to either side can 
disrupt the safe flow of traffic, cause drivers to swerve, and ultimately 
result in crashes.
• • Disregarding traffic control devices can result in crashes, and therefore, 
they should always be obeyed. It is important for a driver to pay attention 
to traffic control devices and proceed with proper protocol for a given 
circumstance. For example, remember to stop at red lights. A right turn 
on red is permissible provided there is no sign stating otherwise, howev -
er, one must first come to a full stop and yield to traffic and pedestrians. 
An inadequate stop or failure to yield could result in injury or fatality to 
the driver or pedestrians!
• • Failing to yield the right of way is a common, but potentially fatal, mistake. 
Drivers should always yield the right of way, including but not limited to, 
encountering oncoming traffic. Keep an eye out for yield signs, school 
buses flashing red lights, and other situations in which a driver must yield 
to promote roadway safety.
• • Following another vehicle too closely increases the chances of a 
crash if, for any reason, that vehicle comes to a sudden or otherwise 
unanticipated stop, or if driving conditions are less than ideal, be it due 
to external factors such as rain, snow or fog, or internal determinants 
like inadequate brakes. It is important to keep a safe distance between 
vehicles to allow sufficient reaction time and safe stopping distance. 
Do not tailgate! It is a good practice to use the “three-second-plus 
rule,” (see following pages) to help judge enough following distances. 
Be sure to check that the vehicle’s brakes are always in optimal operat -
ing condition.
Aggressive drivers fail to consider how their actions behind the wheel may 
affect other motorists on the road. When behind the wheel, a motorist 
should always remain calm and follow the rules of the road. Extreme cases 
of aggressive driving may lead to road rage. 
Road rage occurs when motorists lose their tempers or become frus -
trated because of a traffic disturbance. These aggressive motorists may 
run stop signs and red lights, speed, tailgate, weave through traffic, pass 
illegally on the right, make improper and unsafe lane changes, make 
hand or facial gestures, scream, honk horns or flash high beams. In 
extreme cases, aggressive motorists may cause a crash. 
New Jersey is waging a campaign against road rage. The state has specifical -
ly trained enforcement patrols to help stop aggressive motorists. To report an 
aggressive motorist call (888) SAF-ROAD or, if using a cell phone, call #77.
Note: While there are emergency exceptions to the handheld cell phone 
law, it is always safest to pull over to the side of the road before making a 
call.
DEFENSIVE DRIVINGPage  
91
Distractions
Operating any motor vehicle requires the motorist’s full attention. In many 
cases, crashes are caused by a distracted motorist. Inattentive motorists often 
tailgate, go too fast or drift out of their lanes. They ignore traffic signs and 
signals, road markings, potential traffic hazards, road conditions, and other 
vehicles. Some causes of inattentive driving are:
• • Lighting a cigarette.
• • Trying to fasten a safety belt while driving.
• • Reaching across the seat to close a door or look in the glove 
compartment.
• • Reaching for coins in pockets while driving up to a toll booth.
• • Trying to adjust a wristwatch.
• • Watching children or pets in the vehicle.
• • Trying to remove a coat.
• • Reading maps and newspapers.
• • Eating while driving.
• • Adjusting a mirror while driving.
• • Using a cell phone or any other electronic device.
• • Adjusting the radio or CD player.
• • Applying makeup.
• • Shaving.
• • Using a laptop computer or fax machine.
A motorist should never do any of these things while driving. His/her full 
attention must be on the road at all times.
Tired Driver/Highway Hypnosis
A tired driver is a dangerous driver. A tired driver cannot drive well, and 
his/her reaction time is reduced. The motorist may also get upset more 
easily or even fall asleep behind the wheel. A tired driver can be as 
dangerous as a drunk driver. Maggie’s Law, enacted in June 2003, makes 
it illegal to knowingly drive a vehicle while impaired by lack of sleep. This 
law establishes driving while fatigued as recklessness under the vehicular 
homicide statute. (N.J.S.A. 2C:11-5)
Page  
92 DEFENSIVE DRIVING
When a motorist has been behind the wheel for a long time, he/she may 
experience “highway hypnosis.” The trance-like state may be avoided by not 
looking at any one thing for more than a few seconds. It is also recommend -
ed that a motorist rest every two hours and/or share the driving with another 
licensed motorist.
DROWSY DRIVING – WHO IS MOST AT RISK?
Motorists who are:
• • Sleep-deprived.
• • Driving long distances without rest breaks.
• • Driving through the night or at other times when they are normally 
asleep.
• • Taking medicine that increases sleepiness, or drinking alcohol.
• • Driving alone.
• • Driving on long, rural, boring roads.
• • Young people.
• • Shift workers.
• • Commercial drivers.
Communicating and Driving
Communicate with other motorists by all available means and signals. A 
motorist should always stay in the lane that shows where he/she intends to 
turn. Turn signals (including hand signals, when appropriate) allow a motorist 
to tell other motorists what he/she is going to do. Another good method is 
catching other motorists’ eyes. It may be necessary to tap the horn to warn 
other motorists. At night, a quick flip of the headlights from low to high and 
back to low might be helpful. 
A motorist should always be patient in town or city traffic and try not to 
make quick turns or lane changes. Do not let rush hour traffic become irritat -
ing. Be alert and drive defensively. Always use good judgment in stopping, 
starting, and turning. Knowing all traffic rules, signs, and signals is helpful. If 
a motorist must pull off the road, he/she should always turn on the vehicle’s 
emergency flashers (hazard lights). 
DEFENSIVE DRIVINGPage  
93
Keep a Safe Distance/Do Not Tailgate
A motorist should always keep a safe distance from other vehicles on the 
road so that he/she has plenty of time to react to emergencies. Tailgating 
refers to following too closely behind a vehicle directly in front. This is a 
common cause of crashes. Tailgating can cause a series of rear-end crashes 
when many vehicles are too close together. There should be plenty of space 
between a motorist’s vehicle and others on all sides. A motorist should stay 
in the middle of the lane and make sure there is enough room ahead to stop 
or pass safely.
ONE CAR LENGTH
Although there is no perfect rule for following distance, the rule of thumb 
most often used is to keep one car length back (about 20 feet) for each 10 
miles per hour of speed. At high speeds or in bad weather, following distanc -
es should be increased.
Keep safe distance
do not tailgate
One car length of distance per 10 MPH, 
example above is 50 MPHToo close
Page  
94 DEFENSIVE DRIVING
THREE SECONDS-PLUS RULE
Since many people have trouble judging distances, the three-seconds-plus 
rule to determine safe distance may be easier to use. It is useful at any speed.
• • Choose some fixed object ahead of the vehicle in front. The object may 
be a sign or a tree. Make sure the object does not distract attention from 
driving.
• • As the vehicle in front passes the object, begin counting seconds (one 
thousand-one, one thousand-two, one-thousand-three).
• • If it takes at least three seconds before your vehicle passes the 
object, a motorist should have enough distance for a sudden stop.
• • Practicing safe space management/following distance increases the 
ability to stop a vehicle safely and smoothly in the event the vehicle in 
front stops.
• • Stopping distance = Perception Distance + Reaction Distance + Braking 
Distance.
• • By keeping a foot near the brake, a motorist can reduce reaction distance.
• • Time and distance relationships are designed for the best driving 
conditions.
• • It should be noted that heavier vehicles may take longer to stop.
Try the three seconds-plus rule while driving. It can help a motorist develop 
good judgment for proper following distances. During bad weather, the 
time interval should be increased to four or more seconds.
Following Distances
While keeping the proper following distance in traffic, a motorist should 
always know the condition of his/her vehicle’s brakes. Test them often. 
Make sure of the distance it may take to stop. This is very important on 
wet roads and where there is snow and ice. A motorist should always 
increase following distance when road conditions are poor.
DEFENSIVE DRIVINGPage  
95
MINIMUM SAFE FOLLOWING DISTANCE (IN CAR 
LENGTHS)
Road Condition 20 mph 30 mph 40 mph 50 mph
Ideal 2 car lengths 3 4 5
Wet pavement 4 car lengths 6 8 10
Gravel 4 car lengths 6 8 10
Packed snow  6 car lengths 9 12
Ice 12 car lengths 18
Changing Lanes and Passing
Using the proper lane is an important part of defensive driving. Do not strad -
dle a lane. Be alert to traffic behind. When a lane change must be made, look 
in the rearview mirror. Glance behind to check blind spots. Always signal lane 
changes. 
Before passing a vehicle or changing lanes, keep the following points in 
mind:
• • Only pass or change lanes when necessary.
• • Only pass or change lanes if the change can be completed without 
speeding.
• • Keep a safe following distance; do not tailgate.
• • Check traffic ahead and behind.
• • Only pass when signs and pavement markings permit.
• • Signal every lane change.
• • Signal your return to the right lane.
• • Return to the right lane when well ahead of the vehicle that was passed. 
(A good indication that it is safe to return to the right lane is when the 
vehicle that was passed is visible in the rearview mirror.)
• • Cancel the turn signal.
Page  
96 DEFENSIVE DRIVING
Passed by Another Vehicle
When a motorist is passed by another vehicle, he/she must be careful. Stay 
in the proper lane and slow down to make the pass easier for the other 
motorist. Return to normal speed after the passing vehicle is well ahead. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-87)
Road Conditions
WET ROADS
Drive more slowly on wet roads. Stopping and turning should be completed 
with great care. The three-seconds-plus rule should be increased to four or 
more seconds. Quick turns or changes in speed may cause a vehicle to skid. 
HYDROPLANING
Wet road surfaces can cause tires to hydroplane, or ride up on a film of water, 
starting at about 35 mph, which could cause a motorist to lose control of 
his/her vehicle. Chances of hydroplaning increase as speeds increase. After 
55 mph, tires may totally leave the road surface. If tires totally leave the road 
surface, braking is virtually impossible, and turning is not possible. A gust 
of wind, a change in road level or a slight turn can create a skid if a vehicle 
is hydroplaning. To avoid hydroplaning, do not drive on bald or badly worn 
tires, and slow down when heavy rain, standing water, or slush is present. In 
a heavy rainstorm, try to drive on the highest point of the road. For example, 
use the center lane on a multiple lane highway, when available.
35 MPH
or less35 MPH
or more
DEFENSIVE DRIVINGPage  
97
SNOW AND ICE
Winter driving has special dangers, including longer hours of darkness, fog, 
rain, snow, sleet and ice. Each of these increases the possibility of a crash. A 
safe motorist is prepared for these types of situations.
Before driving in cold weather, start the engine and let it warm up according 
to manufacturer directions. All snow and ice must be removed from the 
entire vehicle. New Jersey law states that a motorist is responsible for any ice 
that flies from his/her vehicle and causes death, injury, or property damage. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-77.1) Always make sure the vehicle has the proper type of 
windshield washing fluid. 
In snow and ice conditions, motorists should take precautions and get a 
feel for the road. Gently applying the brakes while driving slowly will allow a 
motorist to find out how slippery the road is. This will also allow the motorist 
to judge how fast the vehicle can go and still stop safely.  
 
A vehicle will skid if a motorist:
• • Accelerates too quickly.
• • Turns too fast.
• • Brakes improperly.
Page  
98 DEFENSIVE DRIVING
Motorists who have vehicles with anti-lock brakes (ABS) should keep a foot 
on the brake pedal and not pump the brakes. Conventional disc and drum 
brakes require firm, steady pressure on the brake pedal. Hitting the brakes 
too hard may cause the wheels to lock. If the brakes do lock, release the 
brake pedal, and immediately reapply with slightly less pressure. This 
process should be repeated with less and less pressure on the brake pedal 
until the vehicle is under control. Snow tires help driving during the winter 
months by providing better traction for more controlled starting, steering, 
and stopping. Snow tires do not provide good traction on ice. Tire chains 
are the best traction on ice and in hard-packed or deep snow. In New 
Jersey, motorists may use studded snow tires between November 15 and 
April 1.
To start on snow and ice, keep the engine speed low. If the wheels spin, a 
lower gear should be used. When stuck, rock the vehicle back and forth by 
shifting between forward and reverse to escape.
Motorists are prohibited from allowing their motor vehicle to idle for more 
than three consecutive minutes. Among the exceptions for this prohibition 
include motor vehicles stopped in traffic, motor vehicles being repaired, 
motor vehicles waiting to be inspected, emergency vehicles in emergency 
situations, and buses while discharging or picking up passengers. (N.J.A.C. 
7:27-15.8, 7:27-14.3)
Reduced Visibility
Poor roadway or weather conditions require motorists to increase following 
distance because rough, wet, or snow-covered roads may require more 
response time. A good rule on snow-covered roads is to maintain a follow -
ing distance of six seconds or more. 
Frost or ice: Always scrape and wipe a vehicle’s windows before starting. 
Turn on the defroster. If the defroster does not work while driving in freezing 
rain or snow, safely stop the vehicle. Close the windows and let the heater 
warm up the windows.
Fog: Always slow down when driving in fog. Headlights should be kept 
on low beam and fog lights should be turned on if the vehicle has them. 
Pavement markings and other vehicle lights can serve as a motorist’s guide.
Sun glare: Sun visors should always be adjusted to shield a motorist’s eyes 
without cutting off his/her view of the road. Hold the steering wheel firmly 
and slow down. Watch for lane markings.
In all cases, if visibility is greatly reduced, a motorist should stop alongside 
the road or on the shoulder, out of the way of traffic, and turn on emergency 
flashers.
DEFENSIVE DRIVINGPage  
99
Night Driving
Nearly 90 percent of driving decisions are based upon what a motorist sees 
while driving. At night, a motorist’s vision is reduced. To drive safely at night, 
slow down and drive within the range of the vehicle’s headlights. A motorist 
should always be sure the vehicle can stop within the distance that he/she 
sees ahead. 
A motorist should always consider the following factors when driving at 
night:
• • Speed.
• • Reaction distance (distance traveled before hitting the brake).
• • Braking distance (distance needed to completely stop vehicle).
DRIVING AND STOPPING AT NIGHT
This table shows the distance the average motorist will need to stop while 
driving at a designated speed using low beams at night. Numbers are based 
on a motorist’s nighttime reaction time of 1.5 seconds. A vehicle travels 88 
feet per second at 60 mph. Deceleration is 14 feet per second.
SpeedReaction 
DistanceBraking 
DistanceStopping 
Distance
20 mph 44 ft 31 ft 75 ft
30 mph 66 ft 69 ft 135 ft
40 mph 88 ft 123 ft 211 ft
50 mph 110 ft 192 ft 302 ft
60 mph 132 ft 277 ft 409 ft
70 mph 154 ft 376 ft 530 ft
Page  
100 DEFENSIVE DRIVING
Other safety rules for night driving are:
• • Drive with headlights on at dusk, night, dawn, on dark days, and whenever 
weather conditions reduce visibility to less than 500 feet. State law requires 
the headlights to be on when windshield wipers are in use. (N.J.S.A. 
39:3-46)
• • Drive more slowly than during the daylight.
• • Watch for road signs, slow-moving or unlit vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, 
and animals.
• • Allow for more safety margins than you would during daylight.
Driving Situations
A motorist will come across several different driving situations that have their 
own unique safety concerns or requirements. A motorist must know how to 
safely navigate his/her vehicle in each of these situations.
CITY DRIVING
When traveling in a city, heavier traffic and more pedestrians require 
motorists to be very alert. In city traffic, a motorist should try to coop -
erate with other motorists. Drive more slowly and watch for the move -
ments of others. Motorists must be more careful about pedestrians and 
less-visible vehicles, such as bicycles, mopeds, motorcycles, motorized 
wheelchairs, and mobility-assistance vehicles. Pedestrians and individ -
uals in wheelchairs or mobility-assistance vehicles always have the right 
of way in a crosswalk. Motorists must always stop for pedestrians in a 
crosswalk, whether the crosswalk is marked or unmarked.
A motorist should look at least 12 seconds ahead. This means that he/she 
should be able to see an object far enough ahead so that it takes at least 12 
seconds to get to it. While driving at 25 mph on a clear road in a city, a motor -
ist should be able to see about a block ahead. When traffic is heavy, extra 
time to react is necessary, which means driving more slowly. By reducing 
speed, a motorist gains time.
On city streets, a motorist will pass through intersections very often. Many 
new motorists fail to see intersections. A motorist should always consider the 
following safety tips:
• • If at the middle of a block, check intersections ahead for traffic 
controls.
• • When approaching or nearing an intersection, reduce speed. Glance left 
and then right. Keep your foot on the brake.
• • When at a crosswalk, a vehicle should be at its lowest speed. A 
motorist must decide whether to stop or go across. Take quick 
glances around. If clear, proceed to cross.
DEFENSIVE DRIVINGPage  
101
Watch for uncontrolled intersections where there are no lights or signs. Do 
not think that a roadway is protected because it is wide, smooth, or busy. If 
there are no traffic signals, there is no traffic control. Avoiding crashes is up 
to the motorist. Look. Listen. Think.
HIGHWAY DRIVING
Traffic crashes and deaths can happen on highways when the weather is 
good and the roads are dry. Exceeding the posted speed limit or driving too 
fast for road conditions are one of the most prevalent factors contributing to 
traffic crashes.
Major highways are usually in good condition. They often have four or more 
lanes. Wide-open spaces often give a motorist the feeling that he/she 
can relax his/her attention. It is important to stay alert on highways. Some 
highways may not have traffic signals or signals at crossroads. This means a 
motorist must drive defensively and stay within the speed limit. Always be 
ready to react to the unexpected.
HILLS, BRIDGES AND OTHER ROAD HAZARDS
A motorist should always be on the lookout for signs that warn of road 
hazards. These include hills, dips, narrow bridges, bumps, and railroad 
tracks. Drive slowly in these areas. If a vehicle is moving too fast, the 
motorist may not be able to slow down in time. Speeding and applying the 
brakes firmly can cause a skid or a spin.
Motorists should be cautious when traveling in farm country or in open 
land where livestock or deer may cross the road. If a motorist encounters an 
animal, he/she should slow down until the animal has passed. Animals make 
unexpected moves, so a motorist must be alert.
 
Page  
102 DEFENSIVE DRIVING
CONSTRUCTION ZONES/WORK ZONES (N.J.S.A. 
39:4-203.5)
Most motorists encounter construction on roadways. In New Jersey, traffic 
fines are doubled for motor vehicle violations committed in roadway 
construction zones. These work zones are identified by an advance warning 
sign or flashing lights on a vehicle up to one-half mile before the work area. 
Flaggers may control traffic and protect project personnel in the work area. 
Sometimes it is necessary to redirect traffic from its normal path around 
the work zone. Motorists may encounter a detour onto another roadway to 
bypass the work area or a diversion onto a temporary roadway, such as a 
median crossover or a lane shift. If traffic is permitted through or adjacent 
to the work area, it will be guided with temporary traffic control devices. At 
the end of the work area, there will be an End Road Work sign or the last 
temporary traffic control device, so motorists can resume normal driving. 
For illustrations of signs and barricades used in construction zones, see the 
Driver Safety Section at the end of this manual.
It is extremely important for motorists to remain alert when traveling 
through a work zone. Annually, there are nearly 800 fatal and over 37,000 
serious injury crashes in work zones nationwide. In addition, congestion 
and delays may mount, causing the frustration level of motorists to rise. 
Motorists should keep the following basics in mind:
• • Stay alert: Dedicate full attention to the roadway.
• • Pay close attention: Signs and work zone flaggers save lives.
• • Turn on headlights: Workers and other motorists must be able to see the 
vehicle.
• • Do not tailgate: Unexpected stops or slowing may occur.
• • Do not speed: Note the posted speed limits in and around the work zone.
DEFENSIVE DRIVINGPage  
103
• • Minimize distractions: Avoid changing radio stations or talking on 
hands-free devices when traveling through a work zone.
• • Expect the unexpected: Keep an eye out for workers and their 
equipment.
• • Be patient: Remember that work zone crew members are working to 
improve the ride for all motorists.
Reacting to Driving Problems
A motorist should always be prepared for any problems that he/she may 
encounter while driving. Certain situations require the motorist to react 
immediately to avoid a crash.
IGNITION SYSTEM
Today’s vehicles are equipped with ignition systems that, when used 
properly, will prevent the theft of an automobile and vehicle roll away. An 
ignition system permits key removal only when the vehicle’s transmission is 
in the Park position. Motorists in an emergency on the highway may attempt 
to turn off the vehicle while it is still in motion, believing they will bring the 
vehicle to a stop. The basic rule the motorist must follow when operating a 
vehicle with a steering wheel ignition system is to never turn the ignition to 
the lock position while the vehicle is in motion. The steering will lock as the 
vehicle turns, and the motorist will lose control of the vehicle.
SKIDS
Sudden turns, lane changes or hard braking can throw a vehicle into a skid. 
This often happens on wet or icy roads. A motorist should handle a skid in 
both front-wheel and rear-wheel drive vehicles in the same way. If the rear 
end of the vehicle starts to slide, a motorist should take his/her foot off the 
gas pedal. A vehicle may spin if the steering wheel is quickly turned away 
from the direction of the skid.
To avoid a spin, the motorist should turn in the direction the rear of the 
vehicle is skidding, without over steering. When skidding, a motorist should 
look in the direction that he/she wants to go. A motorist will be able to feel 
when the vehicle is back under control and should then straighten the 
wheels. During a side skid, avoid using the brakes.
Page  
104 DEFENSIVE DRIVING
EMERGENCY STOPS
If an emergency highway stop is necessary, a motorist should always keep 
several basic points in mind. On a highway with paved shoulders, signal and 
turn onto the shoulder at or near traffic speed, then begin to slow down. 
Where the shoulder is unpaved, signal a turn and slow down to a safe speed 
before turning off. Once the vehicle is pulled to the shoulder, turn on the 
parking lights or emergency warning lights. Never block taillights at night 
by standing or working behind the vehicle. Day or night put a flare or other 
warning sign just behind the vehicle. Put another warning device at least 300 
feet back (about 120 paces). Raise the hood. Tie a white handkerchief to the 
antenna or left door handle as a signal, if help is needed.
RUNNING OFF THE PAVEMENT
If a vehicle’s wheels drift onto the shoulder of the road, do not try to turn 
back onto the pavement right away. This might throw the vehicle off balance. 
Too often motorists panic and steer abruptly to return to the road, causing 
the vehicle to slingshot across the roadway or into traffic. Instead, a motorist 
should stay on the shoulder and ease up on the gas pedal. After the vehicle 
has slowed down to 25 mph or less, the motorist may turn back onto the 
road by turning the steering wheel one-quarter turn toward the roadway. 
This will allow tires to climb the pavement edge and get back onto the 
pavement.
If a vehicle runs off the pavement:
• • Slow down
• • Regain control
• • Turn slowly onto the road
DEFENSIVE DRIVINGPage  
105
CAR FIRES
Most car fires are caused by short circuits in the electrical system. In case 
of fire, do not waste time. Get passengers out and away from the vehicle at 
once and call for help. A motorist should never attempt to put out a fire.
PLUNGING INTO WATER
Water causes more panic than any other emergency. Actual tests have 
resulted in a few tips. A vehicle with windows and doors closed will float for 
about three to ten minutes. Two major points of escape and self-rescue from 
a submerged vehicle are to wear a seat belt, which will increase the chances 
of surviving the initial impact with the water, and, while the vehicle is still 
floating on the surface, to escape through an open window. It is hard to 
open a door against water pressure, but a window can be rolled down easily. 
Power windows may short out, so try to open them at once. Glass in the side 
and rear windows can be broken but only with a heavy, hard object.
A front-engine vehicle will sink nose first. Some air may be pushed to 
the rear, near the roof. When the pressure inside and outside the vehicle 
is equal, it is easier to open the door. A motorist should try to escape 
through a door or a window. Remember that three to five minutes gives 
plenty of time in an emergency. Wearing a seat belt is the best insurance 
against being knocked unconscious. Once out of the vehicle, a motorist 
may become disoriented underwater. Always remember to follow the air 
bubbles to reach the surface.
STALLING ON RAILROAD TRACKS
If a vehicle stalls on railroad tracks, the motorist and any passengers should 
get out and move far away from the vehicle and tracks, even if a train is not 
approaching. Once clear of the vehicle and tracks, a motorist should call the 
number on the Emergency Notification sign posted at the railroad crossing 
or 911. If a train is approaching, run at a 45-degree angle away from the 
vehicle and tracks but in the direction of the train to avoid being injured by 
flying debris.
Page  
106 DEFENSIVE DRIVING
Vehicle Failure
No matter how well a vehicle is maintained, there is still a chance a motorist 
will experience vehicle problems. A motorist should always be prepared for 
any type of situation and never panic.
BRAKE FAILURE
If a vehicle’s conventional disc and drum brakes suddenly fail, a motorist 
should shift to a lower gear and pump the brake pedal fast and hard several 
times. This may build up enough brake pressure to stop the vehicle. If that 
does not work, the parking brake should be used while holding the brake 
release, so the motorist can let up if the rear wheels lock and the vehicle 
begins to skid. With the vehicle in low gear, the motorist should begin 
looking for a safe place to stop off the roadway and call for help.
TIRE BLOWOUT
If a motorist experiences a flat tire or blowout, he/she should hold the 
steering wheel firmly and keep the vehicle straight while gradually slowing 
down. The motorist should remove his/her foot from the gas pedal but not 
use the brakes. The vehicle should coast to a stop on its own as the motorist 
pulls to a safe area off the roadway.
POWER STEERING FAILURE
When an engine dies, a vehicle’s steering will fail. The motorist should keep 
a firm grip on the wheel because extra hand power will be needed to turn 
or keep control. The vehicle should be brought to a stop in a safe area off 
the roadway.
HEADLIGHT FAILURE
If headlights suddenly go out, a motorist should safely bring the vehicle to a 
stop in a safe area off the roadway. The headlight or dimmer switches may 
help the lights go on again. If this does not work, the motorist should put the 
parking lights, emergency flashers or turn signals on and call for help.
DEFENSIVE DRIVINGPage  
107
GAS PEDAL PROBLEMS
If a gas pedal sticks, the motorist should keep his/her eyes on the road 
while quickly shifting to neutral. Steer the vehicle to a safe area off the 
roadway, turn the engine off and call for help.
HOOD LATCH FAILURE
If the vehicle’s hood suddenly flies up, the motorist should slow down 
immediately. He/she should try to look under the hood to see the road 
or look out of the side window around the hood. Using the center line or 
lane markings as a guide, the motorist should pull the vehicle to a safe 
area off the roadway as soon as possible.
WINDSHIELD WIPER FAILURE
When windshield wipers stop suddenly during rain or snow, the motorist 
should slow down, pull to a safe area off the roadway and turn on emergen -
cy flashers. Call for help if necessary. 
Crashes (Accidents)
AVOIDING CRASHES
No matter how careful a motorist is, emergencies do arise. It is important 
to know how to safely handle any type of situation that may occur. Proper 
reaction could save the life of the motorist and his/her passengers or 
others involved. Above all, seat belts should always be worn while driving. 
If a motorist sees that his/her vehicle may hit something, one of these things 
can be done: stop, turn, or speed up.
Stop quickly:  
If the vehicle has conventional disc and drum brakes, the motorist should 
pump the brakes to gain better control in steering. The wheels will lock and 
cause skidding if a motorist brakes too hard and holds them down. If the 
vehicle has antilock brakes (ABS), they will adjust automatically if a wheel 
begins to lock. With this brake system, a motorist can put maximum pres -
sure on the brakes and retain steering control without pumping the brakes.
Turn quickly:  
If a motorist cannot stop in time, he/she should turn away and drive off 
the road if necessary. If the motorist can keep from using the brakes while 
turning, this will lessen the chances of a skid. A motorist should not brake 
hard if turning onto a soft shoulder of a road. This could cause skidding or 
loss of control. 
Page  
108 DEFENSIVE DRIVING
Speed up:  
Sometimes it is best or necessary to speed up to avoid a crash. This 
may happen when another vehicle is about to hit a motorist’s vehicle 
from the side or from behind, and there is room to the front to get out 
of danger. A motorist should push the gas pedal to the floor. There 
may be only seconds to act, so a motorist must decide quickly. Once 
the danger has passed the motorist should slow the vehicle’s speed.
LAST-MINUTE CHOICES
A motorist should never panic, especially in the few seconds before 
a possible crash. There are some last-minute choices that he/she will 
have to make. A motorist should always be aware of what to do in an 
emergency. Reacting properly and quickly can avoid crashes or, at 
least, minimize damage.
If a crash looks possible, the motorist should turn away from 
oncoming traffic, even if it means leaving the road. Driving off the 
road, rather than skidding, gives the motorist more control over the 
vehicle. The motorist should choose to hit something that will give 
way (such as a bush or shrubs) rather than something hard.
Choose to hit something moving in the same direction, rather than 
something that is not moving. Choose to hit something not moving, 
rather than something coming straight on. If hitting something is 
unavoidable, try to make it a glancing blow. A sideswipe, for example, 
will help slow the vehicle. Try to never hit anything head-on. For every 
inch that a motorist steers away from a crash between the center of the 
vehicle‘s front end and the center of the oncoming object, the energy of 
the crash will dissipate and reduce injury and damage.
REAR CRASH
If the vehicle is about to be hit from the rear, the motorist must be 
ready to apply the brakes to avoid being pushed into a vehicle ahead. 
The motorist should brace his/her body between the steering wheel 
and the seat back, pressing the back of his/her head firmly against the 
headrest (if the vehicle has one).
DEFENSIVE DRIVINGPage  
109
SIDE CRASH
If the vehicle is about to be hit from the side, the motorist should keep a 
tight grip on the steering wheel. This may keep him/her from being thrown 
against the side of the vehicle. The motorist should be ready to turn fast, so 
that if the vehicle spins around, he/ she can try to control the vehicle.
HEAD-ON CRASH
If the vehicle is about to be hit from the front, the motorist should use his/
her arms and hands to protect his/her face if wearing a shoulder strap and 
the vehicle is equipped with airbags. If the vehicle is not equipped with a 
shoulder strap or air bags, the motorist should throw himself/herself across 
the seat to keep from hitting the steering wheel or windshield. Air bags will 
typically deploy in vehicles that have them.
PARKED VEHICLE CRASH
If a motorist hits a parked vehicle, the police must be notified. The driver 
should also try to find the owner of the vehicle.
What to Do in Case of a Crash
If a motorist witnesses a crash or is involved in one, he/she should follow 
these tips to help protect everyone involved:
• • Stop the vehicle.
• • Remain calm.
• • Assume the worst and get help (notify the police; call an ambulance).
• • Wait at the scene but try not to block traffic.
• • Ask for assistance from passing motorists, bikers, or joggers,  
if needed.
• • Depending on the location of the crash – local road, highway or in a busy 
city intersection – warn oncoming traffic.
Page  
110 DEFENSIVE DRIVING
REPORTING CRASHES (N.J.S.A. 39:4-129, 39:4-130, 
39:4-131)
New Jersey law requires motorists to notify the police of crashes where there 
is injury, death, or vehicle or property damage. If someone has been killed, 
do not move the body or permit anyone to move the body until the police or 
ambulance arrives.
If the motorist is involved in the crash, he/she can help the police by answer -
ing as many questions as possible and by giving them as many facts about 
the crash as possible. When damage to the property is more than $500 or 
there is personal injury, a motorist must:
• • Send a written report to the MVC within 10 days if no police report is filed. 
A written report is not required if a report is filed by the police. A motorist 
can get a copy of the report from the police.
• • Notify his/her insurance company at once, giving complete information 
about the crash.
• • If the motorist is shaken up, he/she should see a doctor as soon as 
possible.
DEFENSIVE DRIVINGPage  
111
6
Drinking, Drugs,  
and Health
Page  
112
Drinking, Drugs, anD  Healt HPage  
113
Section Contents
114 Effects of Alcohol
115 How Much is Too Much
116 Drinking and Driving
116 Good Hosts and the Drinking Driver
117 Designated Drivers
117 Drugs and Driving 
118 Healthy Driving
Page  
114 Drinking, Drugs, anD  Healt H
Effects of Alcohol
Alcohol is a drug that affects overall driving ability. Alcohol may make a 
motorist overconfident and unable to think clearly. Motorists who drink 
may make more mistakes. Even if a motorist thinks he/she is below the 
level of legal intoxication, alcohol will affect driving. Drinking even a small 
amount of alcohol increases a motorist’s chances of having a crash. Never 
drink and drive.
Driving under the influence of intoxicating beverages means that a driver’s 
senses and judgment are impaired by alcohol. After two, three or four drinks, 
alcohol begins to impair reaction time, coordination, and balance. Vision and 
the ability to judge distance is affected, making it more difficult to react and 
to drive safely. The only thing that can make a person sober is time. Alcohol is 
removed slowly by the body. The majority (90 %) of the alcohol that is detoxi -
fied is oxidized (burned up) by the liver. The other 10 % is eliminated in breath, 
urine, and sweat. This fact is the prime reason why sober-up-quick methods 
do not work. In addition, studies have proven conclusively that a combination 
of alcohol and anger is responsible for much of the reckless, aggressive 
driving that can cause fatal highway crashes. While most alcohol-related 
crashes involve only one vehicle, they frequently result in the death or serious 
injury of numerous people, including passengers, pedestrians, and other 
motorists.
 
1.5 ounces of
86 proof liquor 12 ounce bottle 
or can of beerEvery drink contains about a 1/2 ounce 
of alcohol. It’s not what you drink but 
how many drinks you have.
ONE DRINK EQUALS
5 ounce glass
of wine (12%)
How Much is Too Much
The only scientific way to check is through blood alcohol concentration, or 
BAC. A simple breath test will show a motorist’s BAC. 
BAC is determined by four factors:
• • Quantity of alcohol consumed
• • Body weight
• • How quickly drinks are consumed
• • Food eaten
The best way to reduce the risk of a crash caused by drinking and driving is 
not to drive at all after drinking.
In New Jersey, it is illegal for an individual to drive while under the influence 
of intoxicating liquor, narcotic, hallucinogenic or habit-producing drugs, 
or with a BAC of 0.08 percent or higher. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50) For individuals 
younger than 21, it is illegal to drive with a BAC of 0.01 percent or higher. 
Violators face severe penalties in addition to other penalties assessed for 
DUI/DWI. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.14)
If a motorist has reached a BAC of slightly above 0.05 percent after drinking, 
the risk for causing a motor vehicle crash doubles. The risk is six times as 
great when driving with a BAC of 0.10 percent. The risk is 25 times as great 
when driving with a BAC of 0.15 percent.
note:  Under state law, refusal to take a breath test is illegal. Penalties 
include loss of driving privileges, referral to an Intoxicated Driver 
Resource Center (IDRC), fines, and installation of an ignition interlock 
device. (N.J.S.A. 39:4- 50.4a) Motorists who refuse to take a breath test 
in New Jersey are also subject to a violation surcharge. Failure to pay the 
surcharge will result in an indefinite suspension of driving privileges until 
the surcharge is paid. (N.J.S.A. 17:29A-35)
It is important to remember that it does not matter what alcoholic beverage 
is consumed. There is just as much alcohol in the average beer as there is in 
the average drink of whiskey or wine. For example, 1½ ounces of 80-proof 
whiskey, 12 ounces of beer or 5 ounces of wine all contain the same amount 
of alcohol: about a ½ ounce of alcohol per drink. Studies show that most 
people arrested for drinking and driving had been drinking beer.
Although food does slow the absorption of alcohol into the bloodstream, 
eating will not prevent a high BAC when steadily drinking large amounts. 
Heavy drinking will always produce a high BAC. Eating does not make a 
motorist sober. The best way to avoid drinking and driving is to arrange for a 
designated driver, use public transportation or call a cab.
Drinking, Drugs, anD  Healt HPage  
115
Drinking and Driving
Drinking affects a motorist’s thinking and slows reaction time. Alcohol 
may also give a motorist a false feeling that he/she can do anything. Law 
enforcement is trained to notice certain telltale signs that a motorist has 
been drinking:
speeding:  
An intoxicated driver often thinks high-speed driving is safe.
Weaving:  
Even though an intoxicated driver may stay in the correct lane, driving 
straight may be a problem.
slow driving:  
An intoxicated driver may be overly cautious and drive slower than the 
normal traffic flow.
Jerking motion:   
An intoxicated driver often may have short mental lapses and not keep a 
steady speed on a clear road.
Quick stops:  
An intoxicated driver may make sudden stops at a traffic sign or light, rather 
than easing up to it.
Good Hosts and the Drinking Driver
Always be a good host. If serving alcohol at a party, always provide alco -
hol-free drinks and serve nutritious foods or snacks. Never insist that a guest 
should drink an alcoholic beverage or insist on refills.
Stop serving alcohol well before the party ends. If someone drinks too much, 
do not let them drive. If no other transportation is available, suggest a nap or 
invite the guest to stay the night. As a last resort, notify the police. Hosts may 
become involved in a lawsuit if a guest is involved in a drinking and driving 
crash after leaving the party.
Page  
116 Drinking, Drugs, anD  Healt H
Designated Drivers
As the first state in the country to officially launch the Hero Campaign for 
Designated Drivers, New Jersey encourages all state residents to participate 
in designated driver programs wherever they travel, whether as a motorist or 
a passenger. Being a designated driver is a great responsibility. The desig -
nated driver is responsible for the safe transportation of friends or family 
members who have been drinking alcoholic beverages. Designated drivers 
not only ensure the safety of the people they are escorting home but also the 
safety of other motorists.
A motorist who chooses to have a designated driver when attending func -
tions where alcohol will be served shows maturity and consideration for 
other motorists who share the road. More information about designated 
drivers and the Hero Campaign can be found at www.herocampaign.org . 
Drugs and Driving (N.J.S.A. 39:4-49.1, 39:4-50)
It is illegal to operate a motor vehicle on New Jersey roadways while under 
the influence of any drugs or while in possession of any drug without a 
valid prescription. The labels on bottles of prescription drugs will describe 
common side effects. Drugs that “may cause drowsiness or dizziness” 
should not be taken before driving. Ask a professional about how over-the-
counter drugs may affect driving. Drugs that may affect basic driving skills 
include cold pills, tranquillizers, and some prescription medications.
Never mix drugs without asking a medical professional about possible 
side effects or how the drug may affect driving. Alcohol should never 
be mixed with any drugs or medications.
If asked, motorists using prescription drugs must show proof of the 
prescription to law enforcement. If a motorist does not have a prescrip -
tion for the drug, and a prescription is necessary to obtain the drug, the 
drug will be considered illegal. After alcohol, marijuana is the drug most 
often found with drivers involved in crashes.
Marijuana use may affect a motorist in the following ways:
• • loss of tracking ability: This is the ability to maintain a vehicle in each 
lane.
• • Distance judgment: Following too closely can cause problems.
• • Vigilance: Not remaining attentive to the driving task can cause a 
motorist to follow too closely, drift into another lane, etc.
• • Divided attention: Driving is a task that requires constant attention to 
traffic, roadway, and weather conditions, passengers, gauges, etc.
Drinking, Drugs, anD  Healt HPage  
117
Healthy Driving
HEALTH
Any health problem can affect an individual’s driving. Even little problems 
like a stiff neck, a cough or a sore leg can give an individual trouble while 
driving. If a motorist is not feeling well, he/she should let someone else drive.
VISION
Vision is important to safe driving. Most of what a motorist does behind the 
wheel is based on what he/she sees. State law permits the MVC to retest  the 
driving population. A motorist should have his/her eyes tested every year or 
two. If over age 40, a motorist should have his/her eyes checked every year.
Good side vision (peripheral vision) is also essential for safe driving. Side 
vision helps a motorist see out of the corners of his/her eyes while looking 
straight ahead.
Distance judgment is also an important component to driving. A motorist 
should know his/her distance from any object while driving. Bad distance 
judgment often causes crashes.
HEARING
Hearing is more important to driving than many people think. The sound of 
horns, sirens or screeching tires warns a motorist to be careful. A motorist 
may be able to hear a car that cannot be seen.
Even people with good hearing cannot hear well if the radio is blaring 
or he/she is wearing earphones. A motorist should always keep the 
radio turned down and never, wear earphones.
Page  
118 Drinking, Drugs, anD  Healt H
Page  
119
7
Driver Privilege  
and Penalties
Page  
120
Driver Privilege anD  PenaltiesPage  
121
Section Contents
122 The Driving Privilege
122 Driving Under the Influence (DUI)
127 Breath Test
127 Ignition Interlock Device
128 Intoxicated Driver Resource Center (IDRC)
128 Motor Vehicle Violations
133 Driver Programs
136 Violation Surcharges and Point Violations
137 Point System
138 Moving Violation Point Chart
140 Interstate Compacts
Page  
122 Driver Privilege anD  Penalties
The Driving Privilege
Driving is a privilege, not a right. State law allows, or requires, an individual’s 
driving privilege to be suspended for certain motor vehicle violations, 
which means the driver license will be taken away and the motorist may 
not drive for a stated period of time. In addition to license suspension, fines 
and imprisonment may also be imposed for moving violations. The length 
of suspension depends on several factors, including which law is broken 
and how many convictions a motorist receives. Likewise, license restoration 
depends on the types of offenses and the number of convictions. A habitual 
offender is a motorist whose driver license has been suspended three times 
in three years. To avoid any problems, it is important to know and obey New 
Jersey’s traffic laws, which are in place to protect every motorist. 
Some suspensions are decided on a case-by-case basis. If the sentence is not 
mandatory, the Chief Administrator of the MVC or the courts may suspend 
driving privileges. Reasons for loss of driving privileges may include, but are 
not limited to the following reasons:
• • Failure to answer or pay parking tickets
• • Driving while suspended
• • Failure to provide proof of insurance
• • Physical or mental disqualification
• • Drug or alcohol use
• • Traffic law violations
• • At fault in a fatal crash
• • Failure to respond to an MVC notice
The MVC Chief Administrator may also require a re-examination of any 
person considered to be a problem driver. This re-examination will help 
determine whether driving privileges should be suspended.
Driving Under the Influence (DUI)
If a driver’s blood alcohol concentration is 0.08% or higher, or a person 
operates a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor 
or drugs, they may be convicted of driving under the influence. (N.J.S.A. 
39:4-50) Drivers under age 21 (the legal age to purchase/consume alcohol) 
found with a BAC of 0.01% or more while operating a motor vehicle will be 
further penalized. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.14)
In New Jersey, a person must be age 21 or older to purchase, possess or 
consume alcohol. Underage drinking is illegal and can have severe conse -
quences for young people who drink and for adults who provide alcohol to 
those under age 21.
If a driver under age 21 buys or drinks alcohol in a place with an alcoholic 
beverage license, he/she may be fined $500 and lose his/her license for 
a period of time. (N.J.S.A. 33:1-81) If a person under age 21 does not have a 
driver license, the suspension starts when he/she is first eligible to receive a 
license. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.14) Also, the person may be required to participate in 
an alcohol education or treatment program.
MANDATORY PENALTIES
First offense/Operating under the influence of alcohol/BAC 
0.08% or more but less than 0.10%. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50)
• • $250-$400 fine.
• • 12- to 4 8-hour participation in an Intoxicated Driver Resource Center 
(IDRC).
• • IDRC fee of $264 for the 12-hour program or $321 for the 48-hour 
program.
• • Up to 30 days imprisonment.
• • $100 Drunk Driving Enforcement Fund fee. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.8)
• • $100 Alcohol Education, Rehabilitation and Enforcement Fund (AERF) fee. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-50(b))
• • $1,000 annual surcharge for three years. (N.J.S.A. 17:29A-35(b)(2)(b))
• • $75 Safe Neighborhood Services Fund fee. (N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3.2)
• • $125 DUI surcharge. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50(i))
• • $33 Court costs. (N.J.S.A. 22A:3-4)
• • $1 Body Armor Replacement Fund. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-41(d))
• • $1 New Jersey Spinal Cord Research Fund. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-41(e))
• • $1 Autism Medical Research and Treatment Fund. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-41(f))
• • $3 New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-41(g))
• • $1 New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-41(h))
First offense/BAC 0.10% or more. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50)
• • $300-$500 fine.
• • 12- to 48-hour participation in an Intoxicated Driver Resource Center 
(IDRC).
• • IDRC fee of $264 for the 12-hour program or $321 for the 48-hour 
program.
• • Up to 30 day s imprisonment.
• • $100 Drunk Driving Enforcement Fund fee. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.8)
• • $100 Alcohol Education, Rehabilitation and Enforcement Fund fee. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-50(b))
• • $1,000 Annual surcharge for three years. (N.J.S.A. 17:29A-35(b)(2)(b))
• • $75 Safe Neighborhoods Services Fund fee. (N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3.2)
Driver Privilege anD  PenaltiesPage  
123
• • $50 Violent crimes assessment fee. (N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3.1)
• • $125 DUI surcharge. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50(i))
• • $33 Court costs. (N.J.S.A. 22A:3-4)
• • $1 Body Armor Replacement Fund. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-41(d))
• • $1 New Jersey Spinal Cord Research Fund. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-41(e))
• • $1 Autism Medical Research and Treatment Fund. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-41(f))
• • $3 New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-41(g))
• • $1 New Jersey Brain Injury Research Fund. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-41(h))
UNDERAGE OFFENSE
Underage first offense/BAC 0.01% or more but less than 0.08%. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.14)
• • 30- to 90-day suspension of driving privilege (on the day motorist 
becomes eligible to obtain a license or on the day of conviction, whichev -
er is later).
• • 15 to 30 days community service.
• • Participation in an Intoxicated Driver Resource Center (IDRC) or alcohol 
education and highway safety program.
Page  
124 Driver Privilege anD  Penalties
Driving Offense 
Convictionloss Of 
license¹Fines, Fees, 
surcharges imprisonmentCommunity s ervice 
(Cs), iDrC² Or 
Detainment Or 
interlock
alcohol or 
drug-related 
(DUi)³ first offense 
prior to 12/1/193 months 
to 1 year$250-$500 fine; 
$1,000 a yr. for 3 
yrs. surcharge; 
daily IDRC fee; 
$100 Drunk Driving 
Fund; $75 Safe 
Neighborhood 
Services Fund; $100 
AEREF; $125 DUI 
SurchargeUp to 30 days12-48 hrs. IDRC 
Possible interlock 6 
months to 1 year
alcohol DU i first 
offense on or 
after 12/1/19 with a 
BaC% below 0.15%Indefinite 
until an 
interlock 
device is 
installedSame as above Same as aboveBAC of 0.08% to 0.10%: 
interlock device for 3 
months 
BAC of 0.10% to 0.15%: 
interlock device for 
between 7 months and 
1 year
alcohol DU i first 
offense on or 
after 12/1/19 with a 
BaC% at 0.15% or 
higher3 months Same as above Same as above12-48 hrs. IDRC
Interlock during 
suspension and 12-15 
months after restoration
Drug-related DU i 
first offense on or 
after 12/1/197-12 
monthsSame as above Same as above12-48 hrs. IDRC No 
Interlock
For offenses prior 
to 12/1/19: a lcohol 
or drug-related 
DUi second 
offense that 
occurs within 10 
yrs. of first offense2 years$500-$1,000 fine; 
$1,000 a yr. for 3 
yrs. surcharge; 
daily IDRC fee; 
$100 Drunk Driving 
Fund; $75 Safe 
Neighborhood 
Services Fund; $100 
AEREF; $125 DUI 
Surcharge48 hrs-90 days12-48 hrs. IDRC; 30 days 
CS 
Interlock required 
during suspension and 
6 months to 3 years 
following restoration
For offenses on 
or after 12/1/19: 
alcohol or 
drug-related DU i 
second offense 
that occurs within 
10 yrs. of first 
offense1-2 years Same as above Same as above12-48 hrs. IDRC; 30 days 
CS 
Interlock required during 
suspension and 2-4 years 
after restoration
For offenses prior 
to 12/1/19: a lcohol 
or drug-related 
DUi third offense 
that occurs within 
10 yrs. of second 
offense10 years$1,000 fine; 
$1,500 a yr. for 3 
yrs. surcharge; 
daily IDRC fee; 
$100Drunk Driving 
Fund; $75 Safe 
Neighborhood 
Services Fund; $100 
AEREF; $125 DUI 
Surcharge180 days12-48 hrs. IDRC; up to 
90 days.
Interlock required 
during suspension and 
6 months to 3 years 
following restoration 
Driver Privilege anD  PenaltiesPage  
125
Driving Offense 
Convictionloss Of 
license¹Fines, Fees, 
surcharges imprisonmentCommunity s ervice 
(Cs), iDrC² Or 
Detainment Or 
interlock
For offenses on 
or after 12/1/19: 
alcohol or 
drug-related DU i 
third offense that 
occurs within 10 
yrs. of second 
offense8 years Same as above Same as above12-48 hrs. IDRC; up to 
90 days CS Interlock 
required during 
suspension and 2-4 years 
after restoration
Drinking alcoholic 
beverages while 
driving or ridingN/A$200 fine, first 
offense; $250 fine, 
second offenseN/A N/A
Drinking alcoholic 
beverages while 
driving or riding 
(second offense)N/A $250 fine N/A 10 days CS
Driving on DU i 
suspensionAdditional 
1-2 yrs5$500 fine; $250 
per yr. for 3 yrs. 
surcharge 10-90 
daysN/ADriving on DUI 
suspension
Driving with no 
insurance (first 
offense)1 year6$300-$1,000 fine; 
$250 per yr. for 3 
yrs. surchargeN/A CS determined by court
Driving with no 
insurance (second 
offense)2 yearsUp to $5,000 fine; 
$250 per year for 3 
yrs. surcharge14 days 30 days CS
Driving while 
possessing drugs2 years Minimum $50 fine N/A N/A
1 Underage drinking may cause a 90-day delay to get a license.
2 Intoxicated Driver Resource Center.
3 Driving under the influence (DUI). Alcohol and drug-related offenses require completion of an 
alcohol screening and evaluation program.
4 For important additional information on second and subsequent offenses, check N.J.S.A. 
39:4-50 to N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.18.
5 Also suspends registrations for the same period.
6 The period of license suspension may be reduced or eliminated if the driver provides the court 
with satisfactory proof of vehicle liability insurance at the time of the hearing.
Page  
126 Driver Privilege anD  Penalties
Breath Test (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.4a)
New Jersey has an implied consent law. This means that motorists on New 
Jersey roadways have agreed, simply by using New Jersey roadways, to submit 
to a breath test given by law enforcement or hospital staff following an arrest 
for an intoxicated driving offense.
Motorists who refuse to take a breath test will be detained and brought to a 
hospital, where hospital staff may draw blood. Motorists who refuse to take a 
breath test in New Jersey are subject to a violation surcharge of $1,000 per year 
for three years. 
Depending on the number of past offenses, a conviction for refusal could 
result in the loss of driving privileges, to run concurrently or consecutively, 
based on a judge’s order. 
Convictions for refusals in connection with a first offense will result in the loss 
of driving privileges until an ignition interlock device has been installed. 
Ignition Interlock Device (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.17)
A motorist who is convicted of a DUI offense may be required to install 
an ignition interlock device in a motor vehicle the person owns, leases, or 
principally operates, whichever the person most operates in addition to any 
other penalties. This device is attached to the vehicle. An ignition interlock 
device has a built-in breathalyzer and prevents the vehicle from starting if the 
motorist’s BAC exceeds 0.05%. 
• • First DU i offense with B aC 0.08% or greater but less than 0.10%:  
Installation of ignition interlock device for three months from the date of 
driving privilege restoration. 
• • First DU i offense with B aC 0.10% or greater but less than 0.15%:  
Installation of ignition interlock device for seven months to one year from 
the date of the driving privilege restoration.
• • First DU i offense with B aC of 0.15% or higher O r refusal to s ubmit 
to Breath t est offense: Installation of ignition interlock device during 
suspension and for 12-15 months from the date of driving privilege 
restoration. For refusal, ignition interlock for 9 – 15 months from the date 
of restoration. 
• • second or s ubsequent DU i Or refusal to t ake Breath t est offense: 
Installation of ignition interlock device during suspension and for two to 
four years from the date of driving privilege restoration.
ignition interlock in non-commercial vehicle for offenses occurring in a 
commercial motor vehicle: 
For a person convicted of a first violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-10.13 (operation of a 
commercial motor vehicle with a BAC of 0.04% but less than 0.08% or while 
Driver Privilege anD  PenaltiesPage  
127
under the influence of a controlled substance), no suspension of the person’s 
basic driver’s license but mandatory installation of an ignition interlock 
device to be installed in the offender’s non-commercial vehicle for the period 
their commercial driver’s license is suspended. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-10.20(n)) 
VOLUNTARY INSTALLATION OF IGNITION INTERLOCK 
DEVICE PRIOR TO CONVICTION
Voluntary installation of an ignition interlock device prior to conviction may 
result in a reduction in fines and, when applicable, a reduction in the period 
of license suspension. For offenses occurring on or after February 19, 2024, a 
person who has been arrested for certain alcohol-related offenses may, upon 
arrest and prior to conviction, voluntarily install an ignition interlock device in 
a motor vehicle the person owns, leases, or principally operates, and request 
from the MVC a driver’s license with a notation stating that the person is not 
to operate a motor vehicle unless it is equipped with an ignition interlock 
device. 
Intoxicated Driver Resource Center (IDRC)
State law requires that any motorist charged with an alcohol-related traffic 
offense must be detained at an IDRC. Each of New Jersey’s 21 counties has 
an IDRC where first- and third-time offenders are detained. Second-time 
offenders are detained at one of three regional IDRCs. The NJ Department 
of Human Services, Division of Addiction Services, and the Intoxicated 
Driving Program coordinates all IDRCs. Department of Human s ervices | 
intoxicated Driving Program ( iDP) (state.nj.us)
During detention, all offenders attend an alcohol and highway safety educa -
tion program. The center evaluates each offender for an alcohol or drug 
problem and determines the need for treatment. Those deemed in need 
of treatment are referred to an appropriate provider for at least a 16-week 
treatment program.
Satisfactory participation in a state-assigned program is a condition for 
re-licensing. Failure to comply will result in further loss of driving privileges 
and the possibility of imprisonment.
Motor Vehicle Violations
• • Unsafe driving: A conviction for unsafe driving that endangers a person 
or property requires payment of a fine of not less than $50 or more 
than $150 for a first offense; not less than $100 or more than $250 for a 
second offense; and not less than $200 or more than $500 for a third or 
subsequent offense. Motorists will be assessed four (4) motor vehicle 
penalty points if the third or subsequent offense occurs within five years 
of the prior offense. There is also a $250 court surcharge for each offense. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-97.2)
Page  
128 Driver Privilege anD  Penalties
• • reckless driving: Driving recklessly in a manner that willfully endangers 
the rights, property or safety of others is punishable by imprisonment of 
up to 60 days, or by a fine of not less than $50 or more than $200, or both 
for a first offense. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-96) Also, points are assessed.
• • abandoning a vehicle: Motorists who abandon their motor vehicles 
on or along limited-access highways for four hours or more without 
permission are subject to a fine of not less than $100 or more than 
$500 and possible loss of driving privileges for up to two years. For 
subsequent violations the fine is not less than $500 nor more than 
$1,000, and the suspension is up to five years. The same penalties 
apply when owners abandon their vehicles on any highway or public 
property or on private property without consent for 48 hours or more 
and when owners abandon their vehicles for any period without 
current license plates. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.5)
• • Carrying alcoholic beverages: Motorists who carry open or unsealed 
alcoholic beverage containers or unsealed cannabis items in passenger 
areas of motor vehicles are subject to a fine of $200 for a first offense and 
$250 or 10 days of community service for all subsequent offenses. (N.J.S.A.  
39:4-51a and 39:4-51b)
• • ice and snow: Motorists of private vehicles face fines of $200 to $1,000 
for each time ice flies from their vehicles and causes death, injury, or 
property damage. Fines for commercial owners and operators range 
from $500 to $1,500. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-77.1) Also, motorists who do not 
remove snow or ice from a vehicle before driving are subject to a fine of 
$25 to $75 regardless of whether any snow or ice is dislodged from the 
vehicle.
• • Highway construction zones: Speeding or other moving violations in 
areas undergoing highway construction mean doubled fines. Some 
offenses include reckless driving, careless driving, speeding, improper 
passing, tailgating, improper turns, failure to observe traffic lanes, failure 
to observe a traffic signal or sign, and failure to obey directions of an 
officer. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-203.5)
• • 65 mph zone: Speeding 10 mph or more above the posted speed limit or 
other certain moving violations in a 65 mph speed zone means doubled 
fines. Some offenses include racing on a public highway, refusal to 
comply with an officer’s request, failure to obey traffic signs or signals, 
failure to comply with rules for passing another vehicle, failure to obey 
road markings, failure to observe distance between vehicles, and careless 
driving. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-98.6)
• • Failure to comply: Motorists face a $50 fine if they fail to comply with 
a police officer’s request to illuminate the driver’s compartment of the 
vehicle when stopped. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-57.1) 
Driver Privilege anD  PenaltiesPage  
129
• • insurance fraud:  Motorists convicted of fraud on insurance applications 
and claims forms may receive fines of up to $5,000, or imprisonment for 
up to three years, or both. In the event the motorist fraudulently receives 
or attempts to receive $500 or less, he/she may be fined up to $500 and/
or imprisoned for not more than six months as a disorderly person. In 
addition, a person convicted of an automobile insurance crime will lose 
his/her driver license for one year. (N.J.S.A. 39:6A-15)
• • Hit-and-run:  A hit-and-run involving bodily injury or death may result 
in a fine of $2,500 to $5,000 and/or 180 days in jail for the motorist. In 
addition, for a first offense, the motorist loses his/her license for one year. 
For a subsequent offense, the motorist permanently loses his/her license. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-129)
• • not a pproaching and passing vulnerable road users with due caution: 
Drivers who do not approach and pass vulnerable road users with due 
caution, which results in bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.2C:11-1, shall be 
fined $500 and assessed two motor vehicle penalty points; if no bodily 
injury results, the violator shall be fined $100 and shall not be assessed 
any penalty points. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-92.4)
• • lying on application: Lying when applying for a license or registra -
tion will result in a fine of not less than $200 or more than $500 and/ 
or up to six months’ imprisonment. A motorist will also lose his/her 
driver license or registration privileges for six months to two years. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:3-37)
• • Driving while suspended:  Driving while a driver license and/or registra -
tion is suspended can result in the following penalties:
• • First offense: Fine of $500 and up to six months additional license and/
or registration suspension. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-40)
• • second offense: Fine of $750, jail sentence for not more than five days 
and up to six months additional license and/or registration suspension. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:3-40)
• • third offense:  Fine of $1,000, a 10-day jail sentence and up to six 
months additional license and/or registration suspension. (N.J.S.A. 
39:3-40)
Page  
130 Driver Privilege anD  Penalties
Additional penalties for driving while suspended:
• • Driving while license and/or registration is suspended for failure to prop -
erly insure a vehicle will result in a fine of $500, an additional driver license 
suspension of one to two years and possible court-ordered imprisonment 
for up to 90 days. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-40)
• • Driving while a license and/or registration is suspended and having 
a crash that causes injury to another person will result in a fine, 
continued suspension and the potential for a minimum 45-day jail 
sentence. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-40)
• • Driving while a license and/or registration is suspended for a drug or 
alcohol offense, refusal to take a breath test or if the motorist is a habitual 
offender, will result in a fine of $500 and an additional license suspension 
of one to two years and/or possible court-ordered imprisonment for 10 to 
90 days. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-40)
• • Driving while a driving privilege is suspended due to driving while 
under the influence, refusal to submit to a chemical test or for a habitual 
offender offense and driving on school property or within 1,000 feet of 
school property or through a school crossing zone will result in one to 
two years additional suspension time, a $500 fine and between 60 to 90 
days imprisonment for a first offense. For second, third and subsequent 
offenses, the suspension and fines remain the same, but the imprison -
ment term is increased to 120, 150 and 180 days, respectively. (N.J.S.A. 
39:3-40)
• • Driving after failing to install an interlock device, as ordered by the court, 
results in a one-year suspension, in addition to any other suspension or 
revocation already imposed, and may include penalties as a disorderly 
person. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.19)
• • It is a fourth-degree crime to drive while under suspension for a first 
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 (driving under the influence) or N.J.S.A. 39:4-
50.4a (refusal to submit a breath test) and the driver had previously been 
convicted of driving while suspended while under suspension for the 
DUI or Refusal conviction. It is a fourth-degree crime to drive while under 
suspension for any second or subsequent violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 or 
N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.4a. (N.J.S.A. 2C:40-26)
Driver Privilege anD  PenaltiesPage  
131
Other violations:
• • Allowing a person to operate a vehicle while that person’s license 
is suspended for driving while intoxicated or refusal to submit to a 
chemical test. A person who owns or leases a motor vehicle and permits 
another person to operate their motor vehicle, knowing that the license 
of the person he permits to operate the motor vehicle is suspended or 
revoked for a conviction of driving while intoxicated or refusal to submit 
to a chemical test is subject to license and registration suspension of 
up to six months, and is also subject to the following penalties: for a first 
or second offense, a fine of $1,000, imprisonment for not more than 
15 days, or both; and for a third or subsequent offense, a fine of $1,000, 
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, and forfeiture of the 
right to operate a motor vehicle over the highways of this State for a 
period of 90 days. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-40(h))
• • A person who makes an intentional misstatement of a material fact in 
an application for registration of a motor vehicle or a driver license, or a 
person who knowingly sells, loans or gives an identification document to 
another person for the purpose of aiding that person to obtain a driver 
license or registration for which that person is not qualified, shall be 
subject to a fine of not less than $200 or more than $500 and/or impris -
onment for up to six months, in addition to revocation of  the registration 
of the motor vehicle or suspension of the person’s driver license. (N.J.S.A. 
39:3-37)
• • A person who has another person take the license examination for them, 
or a person who takes a driver’s license examination in the name of or in 
the place of another person. A person who has another person take the 
license examination for them, or a person who takes a driver’s license 
examination in the name of or in the place of another person is subject to 
a fine of not less than $200 or more than $500 and/or imprisonment for 
not less than thirty days or more than ninety days. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-12)
• • Failure to pay child support or court-ordered health care coverage. If 
a licensee owes six months or more of child support or court-ordered 
health care coverage, or if the licensee fails to respond to a subpoena 
relating to a paternity or child support action, or a child support-related 
warrant exists, the licensee’s driver license and professional license are 
subject to court-ordered suspension. (N.J.S.A. 2A:17-56.41, 2A:17-56.43)
• • A boater convicted of operating under the influence (DUI) on New 
Jersey’s waterways will be suspended from both boating and all driver 
license privileges and is subject to imprisonment, and will be fined $250 
to $500 for the first offense, $500 to $1,000 for the second offense and 
$1,000 for the third and subsequent offenses. Violators under 17 years of 
age will have their vehicle and moped license privileges delayed for three 
months, six months and two years for first, second and third offenses, 
respectively. (N.J.S.A. 12:7-46)
Page  
132 Driver Privilege anD  Penalties
Driving under the influence (DUI) with a minor in the vehicle:
• • A parent or guardian who is convicted of DUI and who, at the time of the 
violation, has a minor (under 18 years old) as a passenger in the motor 
vehicle is guilty of a disorderly person’s offense. In addition, that person’s 
driving privilege is subject to suspension for up to six months and they 
shall be ordered to perform community service for a period of up to five 
days. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.15)
Driver Programs
DRIVER IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
Motorists who accumulate between 12 and 14 points in a 24-month period 
or more will receive a Notice of Scheduled Suspension by mail from the 
MVC.
Upon receiving the notice, a motorist can do one of the following:
• • Attend a New Jersey Driver Improvement Program (may not be eligible if 
points were accumulated within a 24-month period).
• • Request a hearing.
• • Surrender his/her driver license for the suspension period.
Driver Privilege anD  PenaltiesPage  
133
The MVC Chief Administrator or an Administrative Law Judge will determine 
if driving privileges should be suspended for a motorist who is granted 
a hearing. A motorist who successfully completes a Driver Improvement 
Program will have three points removed from his/her record. (N.J.S.A. 
39:5-30.9)
Drivers may schedule training with a licensed Statewide Safety Organization, 
or a New Jersey-licensed driving school licensed to conduct a New Jersey- 
approved Driver Improvement Program. Visit the MVC website at www.
state.nj.us/mvc/license/driverprograms.htm , for a list of licensed providers. 
A $75 administration fee, payable to the MVC, is required prior to scheduling 
a class with a private provider. An additional program fee, payable to the 
program provider, is also required prior to attending the class.
After completion of a Driver Improvement Program or after restoration of a 
motorist’s driving privilege, he/she will be in a probationary period for one 
year. Any moving violations that occur during this probationary period will 
result in a scheduled suspension of the motorist’s driving privileges.
PROBATIONARY DRIVER PROGRAM
A motorist begins a two-year probationary driver period after receiving a 
special learner or examination permit. During this probationary period, a 
motorist convicted of two or more moving violations totaling four or more 
points must enroll in the Probationary Driver Program, which is administered 
by a licensed Statewide Safety Organization or New Jersey-licensed driving 
school licensed to conduct the Probationary Driver Program. (N.J.A.C. 13:20-
17.6) Visit the MVC website, www.state.nj.us/mvc/license/driverprograms.
htm , for a list of licensed providers. A $75 administration fee, payable to the 
MVC, is required prior to scheduling a class with a private provider. Plus, an 
additional program fee, payable to the program provider, is required prior to 
attending the class.
Completion of this program will result in up to a three-point reduction on an 
individual motorist’s driver history record. Failure to complete the program 
or conviction of one or more subsequent moving point violations during the 
test period will result in a suspension of driving privileges.
Page  
134 Driver Privilege anD  Penalties
DEFENSIVE DRIVING COURSES
Most road crashes are caused by motorist error. To reduce the likelihood of 
being involved in a crash, a motorist needs to understand the concept of 
defensive driving. These voluntary courses provide a motorist with standard 
crash-preventing techniques. Upon completion of the defensive driving 
course:
• • Two points will be removed from the accumulated points currently on 
a driver license. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-30.9)
• • The motorist may qualify for an insurance rate reduction. Contact your 
insurance agent for more information.
The MVC will only recognize a defensive driving course once every five 
years for point reduction. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-30.9)
In addition to classroom-based courses, motorists also have the option 
of taking an online Defensive Driving course. The MVC provides a list of 
approved online providers. For a list of state-approved defensive driving 
courses, visit the MVC website, www.state.nj.us/mvc/license/driverpro -
grams.htm .
MATURE DRIVER PROGRAM
A mature driver should constantly re-evaluate his/her driving skills. Defensive 
driving courses are available to mature drivers, 55 years and older, at various 
driving schools or through specific organizations.
Various providers offer a driver safety class that is intended to help drivers 
live more independently as they age and remain safe on today’s roads. The 
six-hour class, open to everyone, helps motorists refine existing skills and 
develop safe defensive driving techniques. The course is also available online.
As a bonus, course participants may be eligible to receive a state-mandated, 
multi-year discount on their auto insurance premiums and a reduction of 
two points off their driving record, if applicable. Other restrictions may apply. 
Consult your insurance company for details.
For a list of state-approved defensive driving courses, visit the MVC website 
at www.state.nj.us/mvc/license/driverprograms.htm .
Driver Privilege anD  PenaltiesPage  
135
Violation Surcharges and Point Violations
Motorists who accumulate six or more points within three years are subject 
to a surcharge of $150 for six points and $25 for each additional point. 
Surcharges are levied in addition to any court-imposed fines and penalties. 
Surcharges will remain operational if a motorist has six or more points on 
his/her motorist record resulting from violations posted in the preceding 
three years. Point totals are based on the date the violations are posted to a 
motorist’s record, not when a violation occurred. (N.J.S.A. 17:29A-35)
Standard point reductions do not apply to the violation surcharge system. 
Convicted or administratively suspended motorists must pay a prescribed 
dollar amount each year for three years.
violations surcharges
Unlicensed driver (N.J.A.C. 13:19-13.1) $100
No insurance - motorized bicycle (N.J.A.C. 13:19-13.1) $100
Driving while suspended (court of MVC reported) 
(N.J.A.C.13:19-13.1)$250
No liability insurance on motor vehicle (N.J.A.C. 13:19-13.2) $250
DUI/Refusal (N.J.S.A. 17:29A-35) $1,000
DUI/Refusal (third if within three years) (N.J.S.A. 17.29A-35) $1,500
Ways to pay a violation surcharge bill:
• • Mail payment to NJSVS, P.O. Box 1502, Moorestown, NJ 08057-9704.
• • Pay online at www. nJsurcharge.com  (online services).
• • Use charge-by-phone: call toll free (844) 424-6829 (using MasterCard, 
Visa or Discover).
• • Visit any MVC Regional Service Center in person.
Page  
136 Driver Privilege anD  Penalties
Restoration fees may be paid online through our website www.nj.gov/mvc/
license/suspension.htm . Failure to pay any violation surcharges may result 
in a collection action. The MVC may file a judgment action in state Superior 
Court for unpaid surcharges, secure a lien against any real property that a 
motorist owns, file for wage garnishment or take other legal actions. (N.J.S.A. 
17:29A-35) Motor vehicle convictions may increase automobile insurance 
premiums assessed by a motorist’s insurance company.
Point System
The MVC keeps track of a motorist’s driving record by adding points to 
the record when the motorist is convicted of a moving violation. The more 
serious the violation, the more points the motorist is given. See the following 
point chart for various possible violations. 
All point violations after March 1, 1974, will stay on a motorist’s driving record. 
Two points will be added to a driving record for traffic violations committed 
in other states.
Up to three points will be subtracted from a motorist’s point total every year 
that the motorist goes without a violation or suspension, and the motorist’s 
driving privileges remain in good standing, but the point total will never be 
reduced below zero. (N.J.S.A. 39:5-30.9)
Traffic laws are enforceable on highways, roadways, parking areas, driveways, 
and grounds owned and maintained by government entities.
Driver Privilege anD  PenaltiesPage  
137
Moving Violation Point Chart
statute violationPoint 
value
N.J.S.A. 27:23-29Moving against traffic: New Jersey Turnpike, Garden State Parkway, and 
Atlantic City Expressway2
N.J.S.A. 27:23-29Improper passing: New Jersey Turnpike, Garden State Parkway, and 
Atlantic City Expressway4
N.J.S.A. 27:23-29Unlawful use of median strip: New Jersey Turnpike, Garden State 
Parkway, and Atlantic City Expressway2
N.J.S.A. 39:3-20 Operating a construction vehicle in excess of 45 mph 3
N.J.S.A. 39:4-14.3 Operating a motorized bicycle on a restricted highway 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-14.3d More than one person on a motorized bicycle 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-35 Failure to yield to a pedestrian in a crosswalk 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-36Failure to stop for pedestrian in crosswalk, passing a vehicle yielding to 
a pedestrian in a crosswalk2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-41 Driving through a safety zone 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-52 and 
N.J.S.A. 39:5C-1Racing on highway 5
N.J.S.A. 39:4-55 Improper action or omission on grades and curves 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-57 Failure to observe a direction of an officer 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-66 Failure to stop a vehicle before crossing a sidewalk 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-66.1Failure to yield to pedestrians or vehicles while entering or leaving a 
highway2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-66.2Operating a motor vehicle on public or private property to avoid a 
traffic control signal or sign2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-71 Operating a motor vehicle on a sidewalk 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-80 Failure to obey a direction of an officer 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-81 Failure to observe traffic signals 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-82 Failure to keep right 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-82.1 Improper operating of a vehicle on a divided highway or divider 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-83 Failure to keep right at an intersection 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-84 Failure to pass right of vehicle proceeding in opposite direction 5
N.J.S.A. 39:4-85 Improper passing on right or off roadway 4
Page  
138 Driver Privilege anD  Penalties
statute violationPoint 
value
N.J.S.A. 39:4-85.1 Wrong way on one-way street 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-86 Improper passing in a no passing zone 4
N.J.S.A. 39:4-87 Failure to yield to an overtaking vehicle 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-88 Failure to observe traffic lanes 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-89 Tailgating 5
N.J.S.A. 39:4-90 Failure to yield at an intersection 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-90.1 Failure to use proper entrances to limited access highways 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-91 and 
N.J.S.A. 39:4-92Failure to yield to emergency vehicle 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-96 Reckless driving 5
N.J.S.A. 39:4-97 Careless driving 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-97a Destruction of agricultural or recreational property 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-97.1 Slow speed blocking traffic 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-97.2Driving in an unsafe manner (points assessed for a third or subsequent 
violation(s) occurring within five years of the most recent previous 
offense)4
N.J.S.A. 39:4-97.3Using a hand-held cell phone or electronic communication device while 
driving. (Points will be assessed against a third conviction within 10 years 
of a second conviction and all fourth and subsequent offenses.)3
N.J.S.A. 39:4-98  
 
and  
 
N.J.S.A. 39:4-99Exceeding maximum speed 1-14 mph over the limit 2
Exceeding maximum speed 15-29 mph over the limit 4
Exceeding maximum speed 30 mph or more over the limit 5
N.J.S.A. 39:4-105 Failure to stop for a traffic light 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-115 Improper turn at a traffic light 3
N.J.S.A. 39:4-119 Failure to stop at a flashing red signal 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-122 Failure to stop for a police whistle 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-123 Improper right or left turn 3
N.J.S.A. 39:4-124 Improper turn from an approved turning course 3
N.J.S.A. 39:4-125 Improper U-turn 3
N.J.S.A. 39:4-126 Failure to give proper signal 2
Driver Privilege anD  PenaltiesPage  
139
statute violationPoint 
value
N.J.S.A. 39:4-127 Improper backing or turning in street 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-127.1 Improper crossing of a railroad grade crossing 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-127.2 Improper crossing of a bridge 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-128 Improper crossing of a railroad grade crossing by certain vehicles 2
N.J.S.A. 39:4-128.1 Improper passing of a school bus 5
N.J.S.A. 39:4-128.4 Improper passing of a frozen dessert truck 4
N.J.S.A. 39:4-129Leaving the scene of a crash
 No personal injury 2
 Personal injury 8
N.J.S.A. 39:4-144 Failure to observe Stop or Yield signs 2
N.J.S.A. 39:5-30.6  Moving violation out-of-state 2
N.J.S.A 39:4-92.2Procedure for motorist approaching certain stationary vehicles - “Move 
Over Law”2
Interstate Compacts
New Jersey belongs to two interstate compacts. Member states exchange 
information to ensure motorists comply with the law and that they receive 
penalties for violations.
The Nonresident Violator Compact assures that nonresident motorists in 
member states will receive the same treatment as resident motorists. When 
motorists receive traffic citations in member states, they must fulfill the 
terms of that citation or face the possibility of license suspension in their 
home state until they meet those terms. Nonresident motorists have due 
process protection and cannot be detained out of state. Currently, 44 states 
and the District of Columbia are members of the compact. Alaska, California, 
Michigan, Montana, Oregon, and Wisconsin are non-members. The compact 
does not apply to parking or standing violations, highway weight limit 
violations, and violations of hazmat transportation laws. (N.J.S.A. 39:5F-1 
through 39:5F-30)
The Driver License Compact exchanges violation information with other 
states and the District of Columbia. Out-of-state violations become part of 
a motorist’s New Jersey driving record. Georgia, Massachusetts, Michigan, 
Tennessee, and Wisconsin are non-member states. (N.J.S.A. 39:5D-1 through 
39:5D-14)
Page  
140 Driver Privilege anD  Penalties
Page  
141
8
Sharing the Road  
with Others
Page  
142
SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERSPage  
143
Section Contents
144 People
146 Vehicles
155 Animals
Page  
144 SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERS
It is important for a motorist to maintain an awareness of how to operate 
his/her vehicle in a manner that safely shares the roadway with pedestri -
ans, bicyclists, skaters, riders of motorized scooters, and other non-motor -
ized vehicles. Sharing the road means being aware of and knowing how 
to safely pass a cyclist on the roadway, recognizing bicycle lanes, safely 
navigating intersections with pedestrians and cyclists, and exiting a vehicle 
without endangering pedestrians and cyclists. It is a motorist’s responsibil -
ity to know how to safely share the road with others.
People
PEDESTRIANS
In 2016, 166 pedestrians were killed in traffic-related crashes on New Jersey 
roadways. Although reduced from 173 in 2015, pedestrian deaths still 
accounted for 27 percent of New Jersey traffic fatalities in 2016 as compared 
to the national average of 15 percent. These fatalities need to be brought 
down further, with the goal of zero deaths.
Many of the measures designed to make roads safer for motorists, such as 
large medians and wide shoulders, make the roads more treacherous for 
pedestrians. Vehicle- pedestrian crashes have a five percent fatality rate if 
the car is going 20 mph, but the rate jumps to 85 percent at 40 mph.
Pedestrian activity is at its greatest in densely developed areas, such as cities 
and town centers, but it also is significant in neighborhoods and along and 
across suburban roadways. Motorists should take special precautions to 
watch for pedestrians.
In most cases, pedestrians have the right of way at all intersections. There is a 
crosswalk at every intersection, even if it is not marked as such. This is known 
as an “unmarked crosswalk.” Pedestrians must obey pedestrian signals and 
use crosswalks at signalized intersections. There is a $54 fine for failure to 
observe the law. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-32 and 33) The penalty for pedestrians under 
17 who violate the pedestrian laws is a $22 fine. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-203.3)
Motorists are prohibited from blocking a crosswalk when stopped at a red 
light or stop sign. A motorist must not stop with any portion of his/her vehicle 
in the crosswalk area. When a motorist blocks a crosswalk, pedestrians are 
forced to go around the vehicle, putting them in danger.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop and remain stopped to allow a pedestrian to 
cross the roadway within a marked crosswalk, and shall yield the right-of-way 
to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any unmarked crosswalk at an 
intersection, except at crosswalks when the movement of traffic is being 
regulated by police officers or traffic control signals, or where otherwise 
prohibited by municipal, county, or State regulation, and except where a 
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided
No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk 
or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the 
driver to yield. A motorist in violation of the law may face a fine of up to $200 
and may be assessed 2 points on his/her driver record. The court may also 
impose a term of community service not to exceed 15 days. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-36)
If a pedestrian suffers serious bodily injury because of a motorist’s violation of 
N.J.S.A. 39:4-36, the motorist is subject to a $100-$500 fine, up to 25 days in 
jail and a driving privilege suspension of up to 6 months.
Never pass a vehicle stopped at a crosswalk. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-36) This frequently 
causes severe injury or death to pedestrians, especially if the passing vehicle 
is traveling at a high rate of speed. When stopping for a crosswalk on a multi-
lane road, a motorist should stop approximately 30 feet before a crosswalk to 
avoid blocking visibility of a motorist in the second lane.
Motorists should watch for signs that mark special hazard areas, such as 
school zones, bus stops, playgrounds, parks, and schools, where children are 
most likely to play or cross the streets. Children chasing a ball, for instance, 
give no thought to traffic. Small children are hard to see. Always watch for 
movement around parked vehicles.
Motorists should drive cautiously along roadways with on-street parking, as 
pedestrians may appear from between parked vehicles. Motorists traveling 
at lower speeds will have a greater ability to stop their vehicle and avoid 
potential conflicts with pedestrians.
Motorists should also follow the Safe Passing Law, which states that drivers 
must approach and pass vulnerable road users with “due caution.” “Due 
caution” means both slowing down and giving the other user plenty of space 
when passing: (1) Drivers must follow all current no passing and no speeding 
laws and move over a lane if there is one to move into, (2) On a single-lane 
road, drivers must allow at least a 4-foot safety zone when they pass, and (3) 
If 4 feet is not possible on a section of road, drivers must slow to 25 mph and 
be prepared to stop until they can pass safely without endangering those 
sharing the road. Drivers who do not follow the Safe Passing Law and cause 
bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 shall be fined $500 and assessed 
two motor vehicle penalty points; if no bodily injury results, the violator 
shall be fined $100 and shall not be assessed any penalty points. (N.J.S.A. 
39:4-92.4)
Pedestrians and joggers should always face oncoming traffic and use 
sidewalks when available. They should cross at crosswalks only on the proper 
signal, look all ways before crossing, avoid crossing between parked vehicles, 
and at night, wear light-colored or reflective clothes and carry a white 
handkerchief or a light. It is not good practice to wear headphones while 
walking or jogging near the roadway.
At night, motorists should watch for anyone walking along a highway and 
exercise due caution. None of the above precautions absolve motorists from 
their duty to be extra vigilant in watching for pedestrians on the roadway.
SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERSPage  
145
Always watch for pedestrians. Be extra careful at intersections, particularly 
when making a permitted right turn on red. Motorists are required to stop 
for pedestrians who have the right-of-way within a crosswalk, and to yield 
to those who are crossing at an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection. Be 
alert for pedestrians when making turns and entering and exiting drive -
ways, parking lots, and alleys.
VISUALLY CHALLENGED PERSONS
The law is extremely specific that motorists must give the right-of-way when 
any of the following crosses any highway or intersection: blind persons who 
use a predominately white or metallic cane, blind persons accompanied by 
a guide dog, or a guide dog instructor engaged in instructing a guide dog. 
A motorist must stop when he/she sees a person with a white or metallic 
“colored” cane, or a blind person or instructor with a guide dog. All motorists 
must comply with this law. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-37.1)
Vehicles
MOTORCYCLES
Be Alert! The laws governing four-wheeled vehicles such as cars and trucks 
also govern motorcycles. However, a motorcycle rider may react differently to 
situations when compared to other motorists. 
Always keep in mind several key items when sharing the road  
with motorcycles:
• • Be aware of slippery, sloped, or uneven surfaces, or grooves and gratings 
in the roadway. These present potential hazards for motorcycle riders.
• • Check blind spots twice before changing lanes or making turns.
• • Watch for motorcycles at intersections and when making a left turn.
• • Always signal your intentions.
• • Anticipate a motorcycle rider’s maneuver to avoid obstructions that 
may be minimal to a car or truck, but dangerous to a motorcycle.
• • Always leave plenty of room between an automobile and a 
motorcycle.
• • Never follow a motorcycle too closely because motorcycles could 
brake within shorter distances than other types of vehicles.
Page  
146 SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERS
When passed by a motorcycle, a motorist should maintain his/her speed 
and position. Allow plenty of room for the motorcycle to complete the pass 
and resume proper lane position.
A motorist’s failure to detect and recognize motorcycles in traffic is the 
most common cause of motorcycle crashes.
For more information on motorcycle safety, visit www.njridesafe.org .
TRUCKS, TRACTOR-TRAILERS, AND BUSES
A motorist should always use caution when driving alongside trucks, trac -
tor-trailers, and buses. Sharing the road with larger vehicles can be safe if the 
motorist knows the limitations of these vehicles regarding visibility, required 
stopping distance and maneuverability. When passing a large truck, trac -
tor-trailer, or bus, it is important to remember that there are several no-zones 
(blind spots) in which the truck, tractor-trailer, or bus driver cannot see other 
vehicles. In addition, during bad weather, a truck, or tractor-trailer, or bus can 
take as much as 25 percent longer to stop.
The no-zone principle
Avoid the areas around trucks, tractor-trailers, and buses where vehicles 
disappear into blind spots. Do not move so close to a truck or bus that the 
driver’s ability to stop or maneuver effectively is restricted. The potential for 
a crash is increased when a motorist is riding in the no-zone. If the driver of a 
large truck, or tractor-trailer, or bus cannot see another motorist’s vehicle in 
the rearview or side-view mirrors, the vehicle is in a no-zone, or blind spot.
 
SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERSPage  
147
NO-ZONE
NO-ZONENO-ZONE 
10-20 FEET
NO-ZONE 
200 FEETThe red areas are 
“no-zones.” If you are 
in one of these areas, 
the driver of the 
truck can’t see you
Rear no-zone
Stay far behind a truck or tractor-trailer that is preparing to back up or is 
backing up. Never pass close behind a truck or tractor-trailer that is prepar -
ing to back up or is in the process of backing up. Because of their width, 
trucks, and tractor-trailers completely hide objects that suddenly come 
between them and a loading area. The area behind the truck or tractor-trailer 
is a no-zone (blind spot), not only for the truck or tractor-trailer driver but for 
other motorists as well.
Page  
148 SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERS
Use caution when passing 
trucks. They make wide turns.
A motorist should increase following distance behind a truck, tractor-trailer, 
or bus so its driver can spot a motorist’s vehicle in the rearview mirrors. Never 
tailgate or remain sandwiched between trucks, tractor-trailers, or buses. A 
motorist should maintain a sizeable space cushion between his/her vehicle 
and larger vehicles.
Leave space when stopping at a light or sign behind a truck, tractor-trailer, or 
bus, especially when facing uphill. Larger vehicles may roll backward slightly 
when starting. Give more road space to a truck driver who is making a wide 
turn. Because trucks are larger than other vehicles, their drivers may have 
to slow, back up or swing wide to negotiate a turn. They cannot see smaller 
vehicles directly behind or beside them. For example, a truck may have to 
swing wide to the left to make a right turn.
Front no-zone
Maintain a consistent speed when passing. Do not pull in front of a truck 
when passing until the whole front of the truck can be seen in the rearview 
mirror. Always signal before changing lanes. Never pass a truck on the right.
SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERSPage  
149
Side no-zone
Drive away from the long blind spots on the sides of trucks. If the truck 
driver must quickly change lanes or make an emergency maneuver, a 
vehicle in this area will be in the way. Do not linger alongside a truck when 
passing.
Head-on no-zone
A motorist should bear right when a large vehicle is traveling toward 
his/her vehicle from opposite direction. This reduces wind turbulence 
between the motorist and the larger vehicle, and possibly prevents a 
sideswipe.
YIELDING TO SCHOOL AND COMMERCIAL BUSES
State law requires all non-emergency vehicles to yield the right-of-way to 
buses re-entering traffic after dropping off or picking up bus passengers. 
However, once the bus is back in the normal flow of traffic, motorists are not 
required to yield the right-of-way to buses changing lanes. Bus operators are 
required to drive in a safe and responsible manner. The yield law was enacted 
to improve safety on the state’s roadways. Violations of this law carry a fine of 
not less than $50 or more than $200, up to 15 days in jail or both a fine and jail 
term. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-87.1)
MOPEDS
Motorized bicycles, or mopeds, are low-speed, two-wheeled vehicles with 
pedals, intended for limited use on public roadways. Moped drivers may not 
exceed 25 mph, must follow all traffic signs and signals, and drive on the 
right side of the road with the flow of traffic.
A motorist should always be alert for mopeds, which are smaller than 
motorcycles and may be harder to see. Moped drivers have the same rights 
and responsibilities as those driving other motor vehicles. A copy of the New 
Jersey Moped Manual may be viewed online at www.njmvc.gov .
BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, AND INLINE SKATES
Under New Jersey law, bicyclists, skateboarders, and inline skaters have 
the same rights and responsibilities as motor vehicles. They are, however, 
classified as vulnerable road users, and in New Jersey, there are high rates of 
bicyclist injuries and fatalities, according to State Police data . 
A motorist should follow the Safe Passing Law when passing or approaching 
a bicyclist, skateboarder, or inline skater traveling in the same direction. This 
law states that drivers must approach and pass vulnerable road users with 
“due caution.” “Due caution” means both slowing down and giving the other 
user plenty of space when passing: (1) Drivers must follow all current no 
passing and no speeding laws, and move over a lane if there is one to move 
into, (2) On a single-lane road, drivers must allow at least a 4-foot safety zone 
when they pass, and (3) If 4 feet is not possible on a section of road, drivers 
must slow to 25 mph and be prepared to stop until they can pass safely 
Page  
150 SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERS
without endangering those sharing the road. Drivers who do not follow the 
Safe Passing Law and cause bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 shall be 
fined $500 and assessed two motor vehicle penalty points; if no bodily injury 
results, the violator shall be fined $100 and shall not be assessed any penalty 
points. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-92.4) 
While bicycles ridden after dark must have front and rear lights, and a rear 
reflector, these illumination devices may be hard for a motorist to see. A 
motorist should always remain alert to the presence of smaller vehicles. 
When turning right, motorists should be aware of bicyclists, skateboarders, 
and inline skaters. Before turning, the motorist should wait until the 
intersection clears. Motorists signaling a right turn must yield to bicyclists, 
skateboarders, or inline skaters moving through an intersection.
To turn left, a bicyclist, skateboarder, or inline skater may choose to use traffic 
lanes to turn as a vehicle would. A motorist should be aware that a bicyclist, 
skateboarder, or inline skater may ride on the right edge of the turn lane.
Remember that motorists share the road with bicyclists, skateboarders, and 
inline skaters. Please be sure that you are helping to keep the roads safe by 
observing these safety precautions:
• • Check your blind spots before turning, parallel parking, opening a door, 
or pulling away from a curb.
• • Check around your vehicle by turning your head instead of relying only on 
your mirrors.
• • When turning right, be sure to check for other traffic, including bicyclists, 
skateboarders, and inline skaters, and avoid turning in front of them. They 
may not be able to stop quickly.
• • When turning left, yield to all oncoming traffic including bicyclists, 
skateboarders, and inline skaters. If a bicyclist, skateboarder, or inline 
skater is in front of you in a left turn lane, wait for them to complete their 
turn before you proceed.
MOTORIZED SCOOTERS (N.J.S.A. 39:4-14.12 THROUGH 
39:4-14.15; N.J.S.A. 39.1-1)
A motorized scooter is a miniature motor vehicle. Although it is illegal 
for these vehicles to be driven on any public road or sidewalk, except on 
designated municipal or county property, motorists must be especially alert 
if these types of vehicles are present. Motorized scooters may be extremely 
hard to see.
SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERSPage  
151
Motorized scooters must be registered in the municipality or county 
where the owner resides and must be insured. No one under the age 
of 12 (or the age determined by the municipality or county where the 
motorized scooter will be operated) is permitted to operate a motorized 
scooter.
Examples of motorized scooters include but are not limited to: 
• •  Pocket bikes.
• • Sport scooters.
• • Super pocket bikes.
• • Mini choppers.
• • Scooters.
• • Mini motorcycles.
• • Mini scooters.
• • Motorized skateboards.
• • Other vehicles with motors not manufactured in compliance with 
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards and which have no permanent 
Federal Safety Certification stickers affixed to the vehicle by the original 
manufacturer.
The following are not motorized scooters:
• • Electric personal mobility-assistive devices.
• • Motorized bicycles and low-speed vehicles.
• • Motorized wheelchairs.
• • Mobility scooters or similar mobility-assistive devices used by persons 
with physical disabilities or person whose ambulatory mobility has been 
impaired by age or illness.
INDIVIDUALS WITH A MOBILITY-RELATED DISABILITY
State law allows individuals with a mobility-related disability to operate 
certain motorized scooters on any public street, with a posted speed limit 
not exceeding 25 mph. In addition, they may operate on public streets, with 
a posted speed limit more than 25 mph but not more than 35 mph if local 
government determines that the motorized scooter does not pose a danger 
to safety and the flow of traffic. The motorized scooter may only have a 
maximum speed capability of no more than 15 mph. (N.J.S.A. 39:4- 14.12 
through 39:4-14.15)
Page  
152 SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERS
LOW-SPEED VEHICLES (N.J.S.A. 39:4-31.1 THROUGH 
39:4-31.5)
A low-speed vehicle (LSV) is a four-wheeled vehicle with an attainable speed of 
more than 20 mph, but no more than 25 mph on a paved surface. It cannot be 
powered by gas or diesel fuel and must comply with federal safety standards. 
Motorists should be alert when LSVs are present, as they may be difficult to see.
TRAINS
Trains can travel on any track, in either direction, or at any time. Motorists 
who ignore passive and active warning devices at railroad crossings risk 
serious and even deadly consequences. It is important to always remain alert 
to railroad crossings and never drive through flashing red lights or around 
descending or lowered gates. 
Remember these important tips:
• • When you see the yellow, circular RR crossing advance warning sign and 
white RR crossing pavement markings, there is a railroad crossing ahead.
• • Never race a train to a crossing.
• • Do not be fooled – trains can appear as visual or optical illusions. The 
train you see is closer and moving faster than you think.
• • Understand that trains cannot stop quickly. A freight train traveling at     
55 mph can take a mile or more to stop.
• • Trains always have the right of way. Motorists must yield to approaching 
trains.
• • Do not get your vehicle boxed in on railroad tracks. Only proceed through 
a railroad crossing when there is room on the other side to get completely 
across the tracks without stopping. Trains can be three or more feet wider 
than the tracks on both sides.
• • If your vehicle ever stalls on railroad tracks, get out immediately and 
move quickly away from the vehicle and tracks at a 45-degree angle in 
the direction from which the train is coming. Call the number on the 
Emergency Notification sign located at the crossing or 911.
• • Do not pass other vehicles within 100 feet of a railroad crossing.
• • If you are driving a standard transmission vehicle do not shift gears while 
crossing railroad tracks.
• • Cross tracks only at designated railroad crossings, where you see warning 
devices. Railroad property is private property, and it is dangerous and ille -
gal to cross railroad tracks at any location other than a marked crossing.
• • When preparing to cross railroad tracks at a designated crossing, a 
motorist should obey warning devices, eliminate distractions, look both 
ways, listen for an approaching train and proceed quickly across the 
tracks. Never stop on railroad tracks.
SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERSPage  
153
SNOWMOBILES, 
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES 
(ATVs), AND DIRT 
BIKES (N.J.S.A. 39:3C-1 
THROUGH 39:3C-31)
Motorists must be aware of the 
presence of legally registered 
snowmobiles, ATVs, and dirt 
bikes that may attempt to cross 
certain roadways. While it is 
illegal for these types of vehicles 
to ride on public roadways with 
other vehicles, they are permit -
ted to cross certain roadways 
when safety permits. Operators 
of snowmobiles, ATVs, and dirt 
bikes must maintain a proof of 
insurance and always display the 
vehicle’s registration.
Page  
154 SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERS
Animals
Animals often dart onto roads or streets. Trying to avoid them often causes 
crashes. By swerving, the vehicle may hit something else or be hit by another 
vehicle from behind. The best defense against such crashes is to watch for 
animals on both sides of the road ahead and be prepared for unexpected 
movement.
HORSEBACK RIDERS & HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES
Horse-drawn vehicles and horseback riders have the same rights and 
responsibilities as do drivers of motor vehicles when using public roadways. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-25.1) When approaching or passing a person riding or driving 
a horse-drawn vehicle, motorists are required to reduce their speed to 25 
mph or less and proceed with caution. 
Additionally, at the request of, or upon a signal by putting up the hand 
or otherwise, of a person riding or driving a horse-drawn vehicle in the 
opposite direction, the motorist must stop his/her motor vehicle and 
remain stationary for as long as it takes the horse to pass. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-72)
Horse-drawn vehicles and horseback riders may not use certain limited-ac -
cess highways and must ride with traffic, keeping as far to the right as 
possible. Other rules apply. Speeding and illumination rules apply. A light 
must be displayed on the front of the horse-drawn 
• • 30 minutes after sunset until 30 minutes before sunrise.
• • If visibility is 500 feet or less.
• • When encountering fog, mist, smoke, or other factors that reduce 
visibility. (N.J.S.A. 39:4-25)
SHARING THE ROAD WITH OTHERSPage  
155
9
Vehicle Information
Page  
156
Vehicle i nformationPage  
157
Section Contents
158 Vehicle Title and Registration
159 License Plates
160 Vehicle Inspection
161 Insurance
Page  
158 Vehicle i nformation
In addition to safely navigating the roadways, a motorist must also under -
stand the requirements for vehicles that he/she drives.
Vehicle Title and Registration
New Jersey residents who buy a new or used vehicle must title, register, and 
insure it before driving it on public roads. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-4, 39:10-11, 39:6B-1, 
39:6B-2) New Jersey law states a vehicle classified under the Lemon Law 
must have the classification on the title. (N.J.S.A. 39:10-9.3) For information 
about the Lemon Law, contact the Lemon Law Unit of the Division of 
Consumer Affairs at (973) 504-6200. If a motorist moves into this State, 
the law requires his/her vehicle to be titled and registered within 60 days; 
sooner, if the out-of-state registration expires before then. (N.J.S.A. 
39:3-17.1) The titled owner (person whose name appears on the title as the 
owner) or a person with authority to act on the vehicle owner’s behalf1 
is required to visit an MVC Vehicle Center to process the transaction. An 
initial registration for a brand-new vehicle is valid for four years. All other 
registrations are typically valid for one year.2 (N.J.S.A. 39:3-4)
HOW TO COMPLETE AN INITIAL REGISTRATION
Complete a New Jersey Vehicle Registration application (BA-49) at any MVC 
Vehicle Center. Provide the name of the vehicle’s current insurance company 
and the policy number on the application.
Show proof of vehicle ownership. For a new vehicle, a manufacturer’s certifi -
cate of origin and dealer’s certificate of sale are proof. For a previously owned 
vehicle, a title signed by the previous owner is proof. For a leased vehicle, get 
a power of attorney from the leasing company. For out-of-state vehicles that 
are leased or financed, secure the original title from the lien holder or leasing 
company. Visit www.njmvc.gov  or call (609) 292-6500  for more information.
Show proof that the required sales tax has been paid or pay the tax at any 
MVC Vehicle Center.
1 Visit www.njmvc.gov  for specific information on who is authorized to act on the 
owner’s behalf. 
2 Visit www.njmvc.gov  for exceptions.
License Plates (N.J.S.A. 39:3-33)
Motorists will receive two matching license plates upon registering a vehicle. 
One plate is provided when registering a trailer, moped or motorcycle. For 
passenger vehicles, one plate should be attached to the front of the vehicle 
and the other to the rear, at least 12 inches but less than 48 inches above the 
ground. Both plates must be clean and visible. The rear plate must be light -
ed, so it is visible from 50 feet at night, even with reflectorized plates. (N.J.S.A. 
39:3-48b) Using license plates covers or holders that obscure or conceal any 
lettering on the license plate is a violation, with a fine of up to $100.
LICENSE PLATE FACTS
• • Report lost or stolen plates to local police. Retain a copy of the complaint. 
Inform the MVC.
• • Replace lost or damaged plates within 24 hours at any MVC Vehicle 
Center and turn in the old plates at any MVC agency or mail them to the 
MVC, P.O. Box 403, Trenton, NJ 08666-0403.
• • Transfer plates to your new vehicle. Most plates are transferable. Visit 
www.njmvc.gov  or call (609) 292-6500  for details.
• • If a motorist sells his/her vehicle and does not transfer the plates to 
another vehicle, he/she must surrender the old plates at any MVC 
agency or mail them to the MVC, P.O. Box 129, Trenton, NJ 08666-0129.   
A receipt will be provided. It should be kept in a safe place.
• • Obtain other information about personalized or specialty plates from any 
MVC Vehicle Center or at www.njmvc.gov  or call (609) 292-6500 . 
• • A motorist may place only valid plates on 
his/her vehicle. Forged or counterfeit license 
plates on any motor vehicle may result in 
a fine of up to $500, up to 60 days impris -
onment or a license suspension of up to six 
months. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-33, 39:3-38)
• • If a motorist terminates vehicle insurance, 
the plates must be returned to the MVC. (N.J.A.C. 13:21-5.10b)
• • If your vehicle is sold, junked or destroyed and you do not intend to 
purchase another, you must turn in the license plates to the NJMVC for 
cancellation. You must follow the procedure for surrendering license 
plates at a motor vehicle agency or by mail.
Vehicle i nformationPage  
159
Vehicle Inspection
All gasoline-fueled, passenger-registered vehicles, model year 1996 and 
newer, more than five model years old, registered in New Jersey, must pass 
State inspections every two years at a State inspection station or a State-
licensed private inspection facility (PIF). (N.J.S.A. 39:8-2, N.J.A.C. 13:20-7.2) In 
addition, all diesel-fueled, passenger-registered vehicles, model year 1997 
and newer, more than five model years old, with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or 
less, registered in New Jersey must pass State emissions inspections every 
two years at a State inspection station or a PIF. (N.J.S.A. 39:8-2 and N.J.A.C. 
13:20-7.2) All new passenger vehicles less than five model years old are issued 
a new car dealer sticker expiring five years after they are initially registered. 
(N.J.S.A. 39:8-2 and N.J.A.C. 13:20-28.6)
All gasoline-fueled, commercial-registered 
vehicles and diesel-powered, commercial- 
registered vehicles with a gross vehicle weight 
rating of 8,500 or less, are required to be 
inspected annually. When purchased at a deal -
ership, these commercial-registered vehicles 
that are less than one year old will receive a 
new car dealer sticker expiring one year after 
they are initially registered. (N.J.S.A. 39:8-2 and 
N.J.A.C. 13:20-37.1) High-rise and reconstructed 
vehicles must be taken to specially equipped inspection stations in Winslow, 
Asbury Park or Westfield. Call (888) 656-6867 for more information.
All motorists must bring a valid driver license, and valid New Jersey 
registration, and insurance documents for the vehicle to be inspected at 
either a State inspection facility or a PIF. When moving to New Jersey from 
another state, a motorist must have his/her passenger vehicle five model 
years or older inspected within 14 days after registering it. (N.J.A.C. 13:20-7.4) 
If the passenger vehicle is less than five model years old, the vehicle will be 
exempted from inspection and will receive a new car dealer sticker expiring 
five years from the model year.
If the vehicle is registered commercially, it is required to be inspected annu -
ally. If the commercial vehicle is less than a year old, it will be issued a new 
car dealer sticker expiring when the vehicle becomes a year old. For motor 
vehicle inspection information, please call 1-888-NJMOTOR (1-888-656-6867) 
or visit www.njinspections.com .
Page  
160 Vehicle i nformation
Insurance
Motor vehicle liability insurance is mandatory in the State of New Jersey. 
Every vehicle registered in New Jersey must have liability insurance. (N.J.S.A. 
39:6B-1, 39:6B-2)
The type and cost of insurance coverage can vary. Visit the Department of 
Banking and Insurance (DOBI) website at www.state.nj.us/dobi/index.html  
to review the many insurance coverage choices or contact an insurance 
company. A New Jersey Identification (ID) Card will be provided for each 
vehicle insured under a policy. This card must remain in the vehicle with the 
driver. It must be shown prior to inspection, when involved in a crash and 
when stopped by law enforcement for a traffic violation or roadside spot 
check. An electronic version of the Insurance ID card is acceptable.
Failure to maintain liability insurance or driving with an uninsured vehicle can 
result in fines, community service, license and registration suspension, and 
violation surcharges.
INSURANCE FRAUD
The Office of the Insurance Fraud Prosecutor (OIFP) in the Division of 
Criminal Justice aggressively investigates and prosecutes individuals who 
engage in insurance fraud. If a person commits insurance fraud by providing 
false information to an insurance company while making a claim or submit -
ting an insurance application, the OIFP can file criminal charges that can 
result in incarceration. It may also impose civil fines of up to $15,000 for each 
violation. (N.J.S.A. 17:33A-5) In addition, a person convicted of insurance fraud 
could lose his/her driver license.
Because fraud increases the cost of insurance for all New Jerseyans, motor -
ists can help the OIFP by reporting fraud. Visit https://www.nj.gov/dobi/
index.html  and click on Report Fraud, or call (877) 55-fra UD (877-553-
7283) . All tips are kept strictly anonymous and confidential. 
Vehicle i nformationPage  
161
10
Motorcycle Manual
Page  
162
Motorcycle ManualPage  
163
Section Contents
164 New Jersey’s Definition of a Motorcycle
164 Getting a Motorcycle Endorsement or License
167 How to Get a Motorcycle License Without a Driver License
169 How to Get a Motorcycle Permit
170 How to Register a Motorcycle
170 Practice Riding and Road Test
172 Prepare to Ride
176 Motorcycle Check
177 Get Familiar with the Motorcycle
177 Control for Safety
180 See, Be Seen, and Be Heard
184 Use the SIPDE System
186 Check Blind Spots
188 Keep the Proper Distance
191 Handling Dangerous Surfaces
195 Ride Cautiously at Night
195 Know Hazards
199 Carrying Passengers and Cargo
201 Learning Group Riding
203 Ride Sober and Awake
205 Checking the Motorcycle
207 Accessories and Modifications
Page  
164 Motorcycle Manual
New Jersey’s Definition of a Motorcycle
According to New Jersey law, the classification of motorcycles includes 
motorcycles, autocycles, motor bikes, bicycles with a motor attached, and all 
other motor operated vehicles of the bicycle or tricycle (trike) type, but not 
motorized bicycles.
The motor power can be part of the vehicle or attached. The vehicle must 
have a saddle or seat for the driver to sit astride or upon, or a platform on 
which to stand.
Getting a Motorcycle Endorsement or License
Every New Jersey resident who operates a motorcycle or trike must have a New 
Jersey motorcycle driver license or a motorcycle endorsement on an existing New 
Jersey basic or commercial license. 
Two exceptions exist:
1. 1. The operator of a three-wheeled motor vehicle, equipped with a single 
cab that has a glazing around the occupant, seats like those of a passen -
ger vehicle or truck, seat belts or automotive steering, is not required to 
have a motorcycle endorsement added to their basic automobile driver 
license, and is not required to wear a helmet.
2. 2. The operator of a low-speed motorcycle.
Applicants who already have a valid New Jersey basic or commercial driver 
license may qualify for test of knowledge and motorcycle road test waivers 
by taking an approved NJ Motorcycle Safety Education Program (MSEP) 
Basic Rider Course (BRC). For details, please visit www.njridesafe.org .
Some applicants may not qualify for waivers, including those in the 
Graduated Driver License (GDL) Program. Contact the MVC for details, at 
(609) 292-6500 .
note:  Anyone under the age of 18 is required to take the Motorcycle Safety 
Education Program Basic Rider Course before receiving a motorcycle 
endorsement. 
note: A valid basic driver license is required to operate an autocycle. A 
motorcycle license or endorsement is not required.
LOW-SPEED MOTORCYCLES
Basic auto license holders can operate a low-speed motorcycle without any 
endorsement or separate motorcycle license. Low-speed motorcycles are 
less than 50cc or have a motor rated at no more than 1.5 brake horsepower 
with a maximum speed of no more than 35 mph on a flat surface. Low-speed 
motorcycles may not be operated on any state toll road, limited-access 
highway, or any public road with a posted speed limit greater than 35 miles 
per hour. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.11)
Note: Anyone who takes a road test at MVC on a motorcycle that is 231cc or 
less is restricted to riding only a 500cc or less motorcycle (M endorsement or 
Class E motorcycle-only license with restriction). If the road test is taken on a 
motorcycle that is over 231cc, there will be no restriction with the M endorse -
ment or motorcycle-only license. Anyone who successfully completes a 
Motorcycle Safety Education Program (MSEP) course is exempt from this 
motorcycle size requirement and will not be restricted. Riders who are 
restricted to a motorcycle that is 500cc or less will have a restriction “5” noted 
on their license and will be required to carry an MVC-issued restriction card 
while operating the motorcycle.
HOW TO ADD A MOTORCYCLE ENDORSEMENT TO YOUR 
DRIVER LICENSE
Enroll in a basic rider course, (or a 3-wheel basic rider course for trikes) or 
begin by purchasing a permit at a local MVC Licensing Center.
ENROLL IN A BASIC RIDER COURSE
Step 1: Take Basic Rider Course
• • Register with an approved motorcycle training provider.
• • Take motorcycle training course.
Step 2: Get Course Completion Documents
• • 100% participation required.
• • Must successfully complete course.
• • Will receive a stamped waiver form and a completion card.
note: You must add a motorcycle endorsement to your license before you 
begin riding after completing the course. No motorcycle permit required 
to take a rider course.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
165
Step 3: Get Motorcycle Endorsement
• • Must bring course completion documents to a driver testing center and 
prove your identity by passing 6-Point ID Verification.
• • Must apply for a motorcycle permit.
• • Must be at least 17 years old; parent/guardian consent required under age 18.
• • Must pass vision test.
• • Must pay required fee.
APPLY WITHOUT A BASIC RIDER COURSE
Motorcycle Permit Required First. Must Be At Least Age 18 To Take The MVC 
Road Test.
Step 1: Get A Motorcycle Examination Permit
• • Apply for a motorcycle permit at a local MVC Licensing Center.
• • Must be at least 17 years old; parent/guardian consent required under  
age 18.
• • Must pass MVC’s knowledge and vision tests.
• • Make road test appointment date.
• • Must pay required fee.
Step 2: Practice Ride
• • Must practice ride for at least 20 days.
• • Must observe motorcycle permit riding restrictions.
Step 3: Take Motorcycle Road Test at MVC Test Site
• • Must bring your own motorcycle (registered and insured), helmet, and 
eye protection.
• • Must pass road test (Must be at least age 18).
Step 4: Get Motorcycle Endorsement
• • Must pay required fee.
Page  
166 Motorcycle Manual
How to Get a Motorcycle License Without a Driver License
**Always begin by purchasing a permit at a local MVC Licensing Center**
ENROLL IN A BASIC RIDER COURSE
Motorcycle permit required first. Anyone under the age of 18 is required 
to take the Motorcycle Safety Education Basic Rider Course.
Step 1: Get A Motorcycle Examination Permit
• • Apply for a motorcycle permit at a local MVC Licensing Center.
• • Must be at least 17 years old; parent/guardian consent required under 
age 18.
• • Must pass MVC’s knowledge and vision tests.
• • Must pay required fee.
Step 2: Practice Ride
• • Must practice ride for at least 6 months if under the age of 21 or 3 months 
if over 21 without any suspensions or postponements.
• • Must observe motorcycle permit riding restrictions.
Step 3: Take Basic Rider Course with An Approved Motorcycle 
Training Provider
• • Register with a motorcycle training provider.
• • Take a motorcycle training course.
(Steps 2 and 3 can be interchanged. You must have your practice riding 
time in before getting your motorcycle license.)
Step 4: Get Course Completion Documents
• • 100% participation required.
• • Must successfully complete course.
• • Will receive a course completion card only (not a road test waiver).
Motorcycle ManualPage  
167
Step 5: Take Motorcycle Road Test at MVC Test Site
• • Must bring your own motorcycle (registered and insured), helmet, and 
eye protection.
Step 6: Get Probationary Motorcycle License (Class E)
• • Must pass MVC’s road test.
• • Must pay required fee.
Step 7: Probationary Riding Privileges
• • Must ride for at least one year.
• • Must follow probationary driver license restrictions.
Step 8: Get Unrestricted Motorcycle License
• • Must be at least 18 years old.
• • Must have completed one year of riding.
• • Must pay required fee.
APPLY WITHOUT A BASIC RIDER COURSE
Motorcycle permit required first. Must be at least 18 years old to take the 
MVC Road Test.
Step 1: Get A Motorcycle Examination Permit
• • Apply for a motorcycle permit at a local MVC Licensing Center.
• • Must be at least 17 years old; parent/guardian consent required under age 18.
• • Must pass MVC’s knowledge and vision tests.
• • Must pay required fee.
Step 2: Practice Ride
• • Must practice ride for at least 6 months if under the age of 21 or 3 months 
if over age 21 without any suspensions or postponements.
• • Must observe motorcycle permit riding restrictions.
Step 3: Take Motorcycle Road Test at MVC Test Site
• • Must bring your own motorcycle (registered and insured), helmet, and 
eye protection.
Step 4: Get Probationary Motorcycle License (Class E)
• • Must pass road test (Must be at least age 18).
• • Must pay required fee.
Page  
168 Motorcycle Manual
Step 5: Probationary Riding Privileges
• • Must ride for at least one year.
• • Must follow probationary driver license restrictions.
Step 6: Get Unrestricted Motorcycle License
• • Must be at least 18 years old.
• • Must have completed one year of riding.
• • Must pay required fee.
How to Get a Motorcycle Permit?
• • You must be at least 17 years old; parent/guardian consent required under 
age 18.
• • Complete a motorcycle permit application from an MVC Licensing Center.
• • Pass the 6-Point ID Verification.
• • Pay $5 permit fee.
• • Pass the knowledge and vision tests to validate your permit.
• • Study by reading the Driver Manual and Motorcycle Manual.
MOTORCYCLE PERMIT RIDING RESTRICTIONS
The holder of a motorcycle examination permit is prohibited from:
• • Operating a motorcycle from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour 
before sunrise.
• • Carrying passengers.
• • Riding on any state toll road or limited-access highway.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
169
PRACTICING WITH YOUR PERMIT
You must practice with a permit for at least 20 days before being eligible 
to take the road test. A motorcycle examination permit holder is no longer 
required to have an accompanying rider.
How to Register a Motorcycle
New Jersey’s annual motorcycle registration fee is $65. To register a motor -
cycle, bring a valid insurance card and title to any MVC Vehicle Center. One 
license plate must always be displayed on the rear of the motorcycle.
Qualified motorcyclists can obtain a Person with a Disability license plate 
that allows them to park in specially marked parking spaces. To obtain an 
application online visit www.njmvc.gov  or request one by calling (609) 
292-6500 . Mail completed application to:
MVc Special Plate u nit 
P.o. Box 015  
trenton, n J 08666-0015
Riders should keep in mind that it is their responsibility to make sure their 
motorcycles are free from mechanical defects and are operating properly. 
Although motorcycles are no longer required to be inspected in New Jersey, 
law enforcement may still perform a roadside inspection and issue citations 
to cyclists for equipment out of compliance or failure to make repairs.
Practice Riding and Road Test
note: The following section does not refer to those testing on a trike. The 
trike test is like the basic auto road test.
The MVC recommends that all applicants practice all riding skills. However, 
emphasis is placed on the following skills.
Page  
170 Motorcycle Manual
1. 1. turning and Stopping.  Tests an applicant’s ability to control the 
motorcycle while turning and stopping. The examiner will evaluate an 
applicant’s ability to stay within the path of the turn without putting a 
foot down, and to stop safely in a painted stop box without putting a foot 
down or skidding the vehicle.
     STARTStop with front tires in box
Sharp left turn
Sharp left turn
2. 2. cone Weave (u -turn). Tests an applicant’s ability to control the motorcy -
cle at low speed while weaving through cones and making a U-Turn in a 
designated area. The examiner will evaluate an applicant’s ability to stay 
within the path of travel without touching lines or cones, and without 
putting a foot down. Cones are 12 feet apart with a two-foot offset.
   ▼  START
◀ Over 500cc engine
◀ 500cc engine and under
Right U-turn
Motorcycle ManualPage  
171
3. 3.  Braking. Tests an applicant’s ability to safely brake quickly. An applicant 
will be evaluated on stopping distance in relation to speed of travel. 
4. 4. obstacle Swerve. Tests an applicant’s ability to swerve the motorcycle 
quickly to avoid an obstacle. An applicant will be evaluated on the ability 
to stay within the path of travel and turn quickly without touching a 
boundary line.
Obstacle
turn    ▼  START
note: An applicant who stalls the motorcycle during the skills test will fail.
Prepare to Ride
Properly preparing for a trip is critical to safety. Before riding a motorcycle, 
check all gear and the motorcycle itself. If the motorcycle is borrowed, 
determine if any operational differences exist.
 
Try the horn and 
controls before 
you startClean, adjust 
mirrors
Check Tires
Condition, 
tread depth, 
inflation
Check gas  
and oil levels
Adjust and lubricate drive chain/belt
Page  
172 Motorcycle Manual
GEAR CHECK
A good rider wears the following:
• • An approved U.S. Department of Transportation helmet.
• • Approved eye and face protection.
• • Protective clothing.
The helmet is the single most important piece of equipment riders must 
wear. One of every five reported motorcycle crashes involve head or neck 
injuries. A helmet improves survival in crashes. Make sure the approved 
helmet is fastened securely. A properly fitting, approved helmet can increase 
rider comfort and reduce fatigue.
HELMET USE
Helmets are required by law for motorcycle operators and riders in New 
Jersey. Operators who carry passengers who do not wear helmets can be 
fined.
Consider these additional facts:
• • An approved helmet ensures adequate peripheral vision for riders. A 
study of more than 900 motorcycle crashes, in which 40 percent of the 
riders wore helmets, found no cases where a helmet impaired a rider’s 
vision or masked danger.
• • Most crashes happen on short trips – less than five miles long – shortly 
after starting.
• • Even low-speed crashes can be fatal. In fact, most occur at speeds slower 
than 30 mph. At these speeds, helmets can cut the number and severity 
of head injuries by half.
Regardless of speed, riders without helmets are three times more likely 
to die from head injuries than riders wearing helmets at the time of the 
crash.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
173
HELMET SELECTION
 
▲ Full-face ▲ Three-quarter ▲ One-halfApproved 
helmets come 
in three types: 
full-face, 
three-quarter, 
and one-half.
Each must:
• • Meet U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT) Federal Motor Vehicle 
Standard (FMVSS) 218. Look for the DOT symbol on the outside back of 
the helmet. Then, look for a label inside the helmet with the manufac -
turer’s name, month, and year of manufacture, construction materials, 
model, size, and other important information.
• • Be equipped with a chinstrap and have at least four-square inches of red, 
amber, or white reflectorized tape on each side.
• • Lack obvious defects, such as cracks, loose padding or frayed straps.
note: Not all helmet damage is obvious. To ensure safety, do not buy a 
used helmet.
When riding, keep the helmet securely fastened at all times. A loosened 
helmet is likely to fall off during a crash.
EYE AND FACE PROTECTION
Motorcycle operators are required to wear approved goggles or a face shield 
when operating a motorcycle, unless the motorcycle is equipped with a 
windscreen. (N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.8, 76.9) A full-face helmet offers riders the most 
protection. A plastic face shield does protect a rider’s face from wind, dust, dirt, 
rain, insects, and debris. Regardless, attention should be on the road – not on 
these potential problems. Choose equipment that is not distracting, so that 
your complete attention is on the road. Goggles can also protect a rider’s eyes 
from wind, dust, dirt, rain, insects, and debris, but do not protect the rest of a 
rider’s face – but a face shield does. Most windshields will not protect eyes from 
wind; neither will eyeglasses or sunglasses. Glasses will not keep eyes from 
watering and might blow off while riding. Face shields and goggles must meet 
U.S. Department of Transportation and New Jersey standards, and should have 
the ANSI label. Because they are plastic, face shields and goggles will develop 
scratches and become brittle with age. For maximum protection and comfort, 
replace equipment regularly.
Page  
174 Motorcycle Manual
Effective eye or face protection must:
• • Be scratch-free.
• • Be made of shatterproof material.
• • Give a clear view to either side.
• • Fasten securely.
• • Allow air to pass through, so it will not fog.
• • Allow enough room for eyeglasses or sunglasses, if needed.
• • Tinted eye protection should not be worn at night or any other time when 
little light is available.
CLOTHING
Clothing helps protect riders in crashes and in other situations. Jackets and 
pants should cover arms and legs completely, while still providing comfort. 
Both should fit snugly enough that there is no flapping in the wind and 
loosely enough to let the rider move freely.
Bright, reflective helmets and clothing help others see a motorcyclist.
Leather offers the most protection, but sturdy, synthetic material also 
provides protection. Wear a jacket even in warm weather. Many motorcycle 
jackets are designed to protect without overheating, even on warm days.
Boots and shoes should be high enough to cover ankles and sturdy enough 
to provide support. Soles should be made of a hard, durable material. Heels 
should be short enough not to catch on rough surfaces. Bootstraps and 
shoelaces should be tucked in.
Full-finger leather or other motorcycle gloves are also important as they 
provide a good grip on controls, while helping to protect hands during a crash. 
In cold or wet weather, clothes should keep riders warm and dry, as well 
as protect riders from injury. Safely controlling a motorcycle with numb 
arms is nearly impossible. Riding for long periods in the cold weather can 
cause severe chill, fatigue, and hypothermia. A winter jacket should be wind 
resistant and fit snugly at the neck, wrists, and waist. Rain suits should be 
sized so they are easily removed and put on, as well as designed for riding. 
Otherwise, these suits can tear apart or balloon up at high speeds. Some 
gloves are made to keep wind or rain from traveling up sleeves.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
175
Motorcycle Check
If something is wrong with the motorcycle, it is important to find out before 
entering traffic. Check these things before every ride:
• •  tires  
Keep tires in good condition. Check the tire pressure using a gauge. A 
tire may be underinflated without a noticeable change in appearance. 
Motorcycles do not handle properly if the air pressure is too low or too 
high. Check the owner’s manual for the right amount of air pressure.
• • tire t read  
Worn or uneven tread can make the motorcycle hard to handle, particu -
larly on wet pavement.
• • rims/Spokes  
Check for bent, loose or damaged rims or spokes.
• • Damage  
Check for cuts or objects stuck to the tread. Also, check the sidewalls for 
cracks. A blowout on a motorcycle can be extremely dangerous.
• • controls  
Make sure the controls work smoothly. The throttle should snap back 
when released.
• • cables  
Check for kinks or broken strands. If a cable breaks while riding, the 
motorcycle could become difficult to control and a crash could result.
• • lights  
Make sure all lights work. Keep them clean.
• • turn Signal  
Check all four turn signal lights. Make sure they flash when on and are 
bright (easily seen).
• • Headlight  
Check the headlight. In daytime, pass a hand in front of the beam to 
make sure it works. At night, try the dimmer to make sure both high and 
low beams work.
• • tail and Brake l ight  
Try each of the brake controls and make sure that each one flashes the 
brake light.
• • Horn  
Ensure the horn works.
• • chain  
Make sure the drive chain is properly adjusted and lubricated. Check the 
owner’s manual for information regarding chain adjustment.
Page  
176 Motorcycle Manual
• • Mirrors  
Clean and adjust mirrors before riding. It is difficult and dangerous to 
adjust a mirror while riding. Swing both mirrors far enough outward to 
show about half the lane behind and as much as possible of the lane to 
the side.
• • Gas and o il 
Check gas and oil levels before riding. Running out of gas is inconvenient. 
It can also be dangerous as it makes leaving the road difficult. Lack of oil 
can seize an engine, causing the rear wheel to lock and loss of control. 
Get Familiar with the Motorcycle
Be completely familiar with the motorcycle before riding it. If the motorcycle 
is borrowed:
• • Check everything.
• • Learn where all controls are: turn signals, horn, headlight switch, fuel 
control valve, and motor cutoff switch. Be able to find and operate 
them without having to look.
• • Check controls. Learn the gear pattern. Work the throttle, clutch, and 
brakes a few times before riding.
• • Ride very cautiously until learning how the motorcycle handles. For 
instance, take turns slowly and allow for extra stopping distance.
Control for Safety
To learn how to control direction, speed, and balance, all riders should 
practice. This manual suggests ways to keep control of the motorcycle and 
avoid crashes.
BODY POSITION
To control a motorcycle well, riders must be in the proper position.
• • Posture. Keep back straight, and head and eyes up. Arms should be 
relaxed and slightly bent.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
177
• • Hands  
Hold handle grips firmly. This helps riders keep a solid grip if the motorcy -
cle bounces. A rider’s wrist should be down. This helps keep a rider from 
using too much throttle.
• • Knees  
Keep knees against the gas tank to keep balance as the motorcycle turns.
• • Feet  
Keep feet firmly on the foot pegs. Firm footing helps keep balance. 
Do not drag feet along the ground. Feet catching something on the 
ground can cause loss of control. Keep feet near the controls to get to 
them quickly, if necessary. Also, keep toes pointed up to keep them from 
getting caught in between the road and the foot peg.
Engine cut-off  
switch
Front brake  
lever
Throttle
Electric start  
button  
(if equipped)
Rear brake pedal
Speedometer and 
odometerTachometer  
(if equipped)
Light switch  
(high/low)
Horn button
Clutch lever
Turn-signal  
switch
Gear change  
pedal
Page  
178 Motorcycle Manual
TURNING
New riders often try to take curves or turns too fast, causing panic and loss 
of control. Braking too hard, which may cause a skid or loss of control, can 
also occur. Riders must learn to judge how fast a curve may safely be taken. 
Approach all turns with caution. 
When turning, use the following steps for better control:
• • Slow Down  
Reduce speed before a turn. Keep speed down until completing the turn.
• • look  
Use head turns for directional control and to look through the turn.
• • lean 
To turn, the motorcycle must lean. To lean the motorcycle, push on the 
handgrip in the direction of the turn. Maintain steady speed or accelerate 
gradually. Avoid decelerating in the turn. Higher speeds and/or tighter 
turns require the rider to lean more in their turns. In normal turns, the 
rider and motorcycle should lean together. In slow, tight turns, lean the 
motorcycle only and keep your body straight.
BRAKING/STOPPING
Motorcycles have two brakes. Both are needed to stop effectively and safely. 
The front brake provides about three-quarters of the stopping power. Front 
wheel locks release the lever until the tire regains traction. If the rear wheel 
locks, do not release it. Keep it locked until the motorcycle comes to a stop.
When braking, remember:
• • Practice using the front brake correctly. Braking is an activity that requires 
continuous practice for maximum proficiency.
• • When slowing down or stopping, always use both brakes. This ensures 
riders have enough skill to use the front brake properly when needed.
• • Apply both brakes at the same time. Do not apply the rear brake first.
SHIFTING
There is more to shifting than getting the motorcycle to accelerate smoothly. 
Instability can occur if the gears are used incorrectly when downshifting, 
turning, or starting from a standstill on a hill. Change gears to match the 
engine speed with the road speed.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
179
DOWNSHIFTING
It is important to shift down through gears for the appropriate slowdown 
or stop. This ensures riders always have enough power to accelerate quickly 
if needed. Travel at the proper speed to shift into a lower gear. Motorcycles 
may lurch, and the gear wheel may lock up, if downshifting is performed at 
too fast a speed or the clutch is released abruptly. Remember:
• • Riding downhill. Motorcycles tend to pick up speed on a downgrade.
• • Shifting into first gear. On many motorcycles, the speed range for first 
gear is exceptionally low. Under these conditions, use the brakes to slow 
down enough to shift safely.
GOING UPHILL
It is more difficult to get the motorcycle moving on an upgrade than it is on 
flat ground. There is always a danger of rolling backward and into another 
vehicle. Remember:
• • Use the front brake to hold the motorcycle while starting the engine and 
shifting into first gear.
• • Change to the foot brake to hold the motorcycle while operating the 
throttle with the right hand.
• • For more power, open the throttle a little bit.
• • Release the clutch gradually. The front wheel may come off the ground or 
the engine may stop, or both, if it is released too quickly.
• • Release the foot brake when the engine begins to slow down, and the 
motorcycle begins to move forward.
See, Be Seen, and Be Heard
In crashes with motorcyclists, other motorists often say that they never 
saw the motorcycle. From ahead or from behind, a motorcycle’s outline is 
small, and it is easier for other motorists to misjudge distance and speed. 
However, there are ways to make riders and motorcycles more noticeable.
Page  
180 Motorcycle Manual
CLOTHING
Bright, reflective helmets and clothing help others see the motorcycle. 
Upper body clothing should be brightly colored orange, yellow, red, or 
green. Fluorescent colors are enough in bright daylight. At night, reflec -
tive or retro-reflective clothing is best. 
Reflective materials are passive and do not change their brightness. Retro-
reflective materials change brightness with surrounding light sources. They 
greatly increase the visibility of objects at night or during inclement weather.
HEADLIGHT
The best way to help others see you is to always keep headlights on. 
During the day, a motorcycle with lights off is twice as likely to go 
unnoticed. The headlight in many later-model motorcycles comes on 
automatically.
SIGNALS
Signals communicate intentions to other road users.
Turn Signals
Use turn signals to:
• • Clearly indicate lane changes and other riding maneuvers.
• • Become easier to see. Other motorists can easily see turn signals.
The required signal may be given “by means of the hand and arm…or by an 
approved mechanical or electrical signal device.” “A signal of intention to turn 
right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than 
the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning.” (N.J.S.A. 39:4-126)
note: Turn off turn signals after the turn or lane change is made. If not, 
other motorists might be confused about a rider’s intentions.
BRAKE LIGHT
Help others see the motorcycle by tapping the foot brake lightly before 
slowing down. This action will flash the brake light. It is especially important 
to signal others by flashing the brake light when:
• • Slowing down more quickly than might be expected. (For example, 
before making a turn from a high-speed highway.)
• • Slowing down where others may not expect it. (For example, before 
slowing down to the turn in the middle of a block.)
• • When being followed closely, flash the brake light before slowing down. 
(This cannot be done, however, in an emergency situation.)
Motorcycle ManualPage  
181
HORN
Use the horn to get the attention of other motorists, but do not rely solely on 
it. Use the horn when someone is in the driver’s seat of a vehicle parked on 
the street, riding a bicycle, or walking in the street, and may pull into traffic. 
In an emergency, use the horn and be ready to slow down or turn away from 
danger.
The two biggest dangers are:
• • Oncoming vehicles turning left.
• • Vehicles on side streets pulling into traffic. Never count on “eye contact” 
as a sign that a motorist is aware and will yield the right-of-way. All too 
often, a motorist looks right at a motorcycle and still does not see it.
ROAD POSITION
Motorists have little choice about positioning in travel lanes. However, each 
marked lane provides three possible travel paths to motorcyclists. To be 
seen most clearly, ride in the portion of the lane where it is most likely a 
motorist can see a motorcycle. When behind a vehicle, ride where the 
motorist can see the motorcycle in the rearview mirror. Be sure you can see 
the rearview mirror of the vehicle in front of you. If you can see the rearview 
mirror in front of you, it is more likely the driver can see you.
BLIND SPOTS
When alongside a vehicle, speed up and get by quickly or drop back.
Visible area
Page  
182 Motorcycle Manual
CENTER POSITION
It is not true that riding in the center of a lane is dangerous because of the 
grease strip residue left by other vehicles. Still, it is best to ride slightly to the 
left or the right of center. 
Unless the road is wet with rain, traction on most grease strips is the same 
as the rest of the pavement. However, big grease buildups found at busy 
intersections or tollbooths should be avoided.
INTERSECTIONS
Enter the intersection with a space cushion on either side that allows 
evasive action if necessary. Approach an intersection with the best view of 
oncoming traffic.
Blind area
Blind area
When approaching a blind intersection, move to the portion of the lane in the 
other motorists’ field of sight. Remember, the key is to see as much as possible.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
183
Use the SIPDE System
Nothing can guarantee that other motorists will see a motorcycle. A good 
rider is always looking to stay out of trouble.
Experienced riders use a system known as SIPDE, an acronym for a process 
used to make judgments and act in traffic. SIPD e = Scan, Identify, Predict, 
Decide, Execute.
Here is a closer look at each of these steps.
SCAN
Search aggressively for potential hazards. Scanning provides information to 
allow riders to make decisions in enough time to act.
IDENTIFY
Locate hazards and potential conflicts. Hazards can be divided into three groups 
based on how critical their effect may be.
Page  
184 Motorcycle Manual
• • Cars, trucks, and other vehicles. They share the road with motorcycles. They 
move quickly. Reactions to them must be quick and accurate.
• • Pedestrians and animals. They are characterized by unpredictability and 
quick movement.
• • Stationary objects. Potholes, guardrails, bridges, roadway signs, hedges, or 
rows of trees will only create or complicate riding strategy.
The greatest potential for conflict between riders and other traffic is at 
intersections. An intersection can be in the middle of an urban area or at a 
driveway on a residential street. Most motorcycle/automobile crashes occur 
at intersections. Oncoming vehicles turning left into the path of the motorcy -
cle causes many crashes. Therefore, using SIPDE at intersections is critical.
Before entering an intersection, search for:
• • Oncoming traffic that may turn left.
• • Traffic from the left.
• • Traffic from the right.
• • Traffic approaching from behind.
Be alert at intersections with limited visibility. Be visually aware of busy 
surroundings that might camouflage a motorcycle.
PREDICT
Anticipate the effect of hazards. The direction a potential hazard moves is 
important. Clearly, a vehicle moving away is not as critical as a vehicle moving 
into a rider’s path.
Determine the effect of the hazard and where a crash might occur. How 
critical is the hazard? How probable is a crash? This is the “What if…” phase 
of SIPDE that depends on knowledge and experience. Now, estimate the 
consequences of the hazard. How might the hazard – or effort to avoid it – 
affect others?
DECIDE
Determine how to reduce the hazard by:
• • Communicating presence and intentions.
• • Adjusting speed.
• • Adjusting position.
Communication is the most passive action because it depends on the 
response of someone else. Use lights and honk the horn but do not rely on 
the actions of others. Speed adjustment can be acceleration, slowing or 
stopping. Position adjustment can be changing lane position or completely 
changing direction.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
185
In both cases, the degree of adjustment depends on how critical the hazard 
is and how much time and space is available: The more time and space, the 
less amount of risk.
In high potential risk areas, such as intersections, decrease the reaction time that is 
needed by increasing space and readying possible escape routes.
EXECUTE
This is when riding skills come into play, which must become second nature. 
The best decision will be meaningless without the skills to carry it out. Riders 
must ride within their own ability.
Check Blind Spots
USING HEAD CHECKS
Motorcycles have blind spots just like other vehicles do. When changing lanes, 
turn and look at the traffic behind. That is the only way to see a vehicle behind 
and in the next lane. It is particularly important before a rapid lane change. 
Many riders make rapid lane changes out of necessity and habit. There is very 
little chance a motorist in the next lane can react quickly enough to avoid a 
rapid lane change. Check first, and then change.
On a roadway with several lanes, check the far lanes, too. Another motorist 
could be headed for the same space.
USING MIRRORS
Traffic situations change quickly. Check mirrors every few seconds to see 
what traffic is approaching from behind. That way, passing cars and other 
vehicles will not be a surprise. There are particular times when it is very 
important to use mirrors.
Page  
186 Motorcycle Manual
Rider’s 
blind 
spotArea seen 
in mirrors
• • When slowing down or stopping suddenly. If there is a vehicle close 
behind, it may be better to keep moving.
• • When stopped at an intersection. Watch vehicles approaching from 
behind. Evasive action may be necessary if an approaching motorist is not 
paying attention.
• • When changing lanes. Make sure no one is about to pass.
• • When turning. Watch vehicles behind, especially when making what 
could be an unexpected turn, such as into alleys, driveways, and side 
streets.
Many motorcycles have round, convex mirrors, which provide a bigger view 
of the road behind than flat mirrors. However, these mirrors make vehicles 
seem farther away than they really are. To get used to convex mirrors: While 
stopped, pick out a parked vehicle in the mirror and form a mental image 
of how far away that vehicle is. Then, turn around and look to see how close 
it really is. Practice helps riders judge distance well. Even then, allow extra 
distance before changing lanes. Regardless, always make a final head check 
before changing lanes.
POSITIONING
Motorcycle riders can see things other motorists cannot see by riding the 
portion of the lane where they are most likely to be seen.
riding through curves.  Move to one side of the lane or the other to get a 
better view of the curve.
Watching at intersections. Riders can peek easily around buildings, parked 
vehicles, or bushes to see if anything is coming. Other motorists cannot.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
187
Stopping at blind intersections.  Blind intersections can make it hard to 
see danger coming from the side. At a stop sign, stop there first. Then, 
edge forward and stop again, just short of where the cross-traffic lane 
meets the lane you are in. From that position, lean forward and look 
around buildings, parked vehicles, or bushes. Keep the front wheel out of 
the cross lane of travel while doing this.
Seeing at the roadside.  Angle the motorcycle across the road to see both 
directions without straining, which is particularly important before making a 
U-turn.
Keep the Proper Distance
 
Correct 
for inside 
curvesCorrect  
for outside 
curves
The best protection is distance between a motorcycle and other motorists. If 
another motorist makes a mistake, distance provides time to react and time 
to move away.
FRONT
Under ordinary conditions, stay at least two seconds behind the vehicle 
ahead.
This provides plenty of time to react if the motorist ahead stops suddenly. It 
also provides a better view of things in the road, such as potholes, slippery 
spots, tire treads, and other debris.
Stay well behind the vehicle ahead, even when stopped. This will make it 
easier to get out of the way if someone bears down from behind.
Page  
188 Motorcycle Manual
SIDE
For oncoming or passing vehicles, move to the center of the lane.
A rider can move from one side of the lane to another to increase their 
distance from other vehicles. An experienced rider changes position from 
one side of the lane to another as traffic conditions change. These road 
conditions require lane position changes:
Passing vehicles. When another vehicle passes from behind, move toward 
the center of the lane. A slight mistake by either motorist could cause a 
sideswipe. Moving toward the center of the lane also helps avoid extended 
mirrors or things thrown from vehicle windows. Do the same for oncoming 
vehicles. Give way to large trucks. They can create gusts that affect control. 
There is more room for error in the middle of the lane.
riding and intersections. Most crashes between vehicles and motorcy -
cles happen at intersections. Motorists often have a hard time seeing a 
motorcycle coming directly at them. A vehicle may make a left turn across 
the motorcycle’s path or a vehicle may enter from a side street into the 
motorcycle’s path. These are two leading causes of motorcycle crashes at 
intersections.
In the event a vehicle enters a rider’s path:
• • Move as far away from the vehicle as possible. If the vehicle is on the right, 
move to the left. For a vehicle on the left or an oncoming vehicle with a 
left turn signal on, move to the right.
• • Change lanes. Otherwise, move to the far side of the current lane.
• • Approach slowly. If a motorist does pull out suddenly, chances of making 
a quick stop or a quick turn are better.
At intersections, move as far away from oncoming vehicles as safely as 
possible.
Passing parked vehicles. When passing parked vehicles, the motorcycle 
rider has an advantage over other motorists. Stay in the left portion of the 
lane to avoid problems caused by doors opening, motorists getting out of 
their vehicles or people stepping into traffic from between vehicles. Vehicles 
pulling out of parking spaces are another source of danger. Motorists can fail 
to see a motorcycle during a quick look behind for traffic. Motorists making 
U-turns are also a danger. The motorcycle rider sees the other motorist pull 
out and slows down or changes lanes to let them enter. Then suddenly, 
the other vehicle turns across the road and blocks the lane. This leaves the 
motorcyclist with no place to go. Approach vehicles pulling out or making a 
U-turn very cautiously.
Stay to the left of the lane to pass parked vehicles.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
189
Sharing lanes. Vehicles and motorcycles each need a full lane to operate 
safely.
 To prevent lane sharing:
• • Do not ride between rows of stopped vehicles.
• • Do not try to squeeze past a stopped vehicle in the same lane. Anything 
could happen – a hand could come out of the window; a door could open 
or a vehicle could turn suddenly.
• •  Discourage lane sharing by others. The best way to do this is to keep a 
center lane position in situations where other motorists might be tempt -
ed to squeeze by.
Moving to the far side of a lane in these situations invites lane sharing. Lane 
placement depends on different circumstances. Ride in the portion of the 
lane where it is easiest to be seen.
Page  
190 Motorcycle Manual
Merging vehicles. Vehicles entering a highway from an entrance ramp 
may have trouble seeing a motorcycle. One reason is that motorcycle 
headlights are difficult to see at an angle. Change lanes or make 
space to let the motorist in. Do not assume that motorists always see 
motorcycles.
Vehicles alongside.  Whenever possible do not ride alongside other 
vehicles. A vehicle in the next lane could change lanes without warning. A 
vehicle in the next lane can also block a possible escape route. Speed up or 
drop back until it is clear on both sides.
BACK
Many riders complain about tailgaters, which are motorists that follow too 
closely. When another vehicle is following too closely:
• • Open up additional following distance. This provides the tailgater more 
time to react in an emergency.
• • Slow down so the tailgater can pass when clear. 
Handling Dangerous Surfaces
A motorcycle is delicately balanced on two wheels. To stay upright, the two 
wheels must have good traction. Any surface that affects the motorcycle’s 
traction will affect its balance. Any slippery surface increases the chance of a 
rider falling. 
Dangerous surfaces include:
• • Slippery surfaces.
• • Uneven surfaces.
• • Grooves and gratings.
• • Sloping surfaces.
Some slippery surfaces are caused by:
• • Liquids.
• • Sand/Gravel.
• • Leaves.
• • Wet pavement, particularly just after rain and before surface oil washes to 
the side of the road.
• • Gravel roads or places where sand and gravel have collected on paved 
roads.
• • Mud, snow, and ice.
• • Wet lane markings and steel surfaces (manhole covers).
Page  
191 Motorcycle Manual
• • Metal construction plates.
There are a number of precautions that riders can take to operate more 
safely on slippery surfaces.
reduce speed.  It takes longer to stop on slippery surfaces. Make up for this 
by traveling at a slower speed. It is particularly important to reduce speed on 
curves. Remember, speed limits posted on curves apply to good, dry surface 
conditions.
use both brakes. The front brake is still more effective than the back brake – 
even on extremely slippery surfaces. On ice, riders should not brake at all.
avoid sudden moves. Any sudden change in speed or direction can cause 
a skid on slippery surfaces. Therefore, turn, brake, accelerate, and change 
gears as little and as gradually as possible. On a very slippery surface, such 
as on a patch of ice, do not make changes until after passing it.
avoid slippery areas.  It is important to find the best pavement. Riders 
should be aware that:
• • Oil from vehicles tends to build up in the center of the lane, particularly 
near the intersections where vehicles slow down or stop. On wet pave -
ment, therefore, it is better to operate in the grooves created by the 
wheels of moving vehicles. Some people suggest using the left wheel 
track all the time. However, this may not always be a good idea. Instead, 
ride in the portion of the lane where it is easiest to be seen.
• • Oil spots when stopping or parking can cause riders to fall.
• • Dirt and gravel tend to collect along the sides of the road. It is very 
important to stay away from the edge of the road when making sharp 
turns at intersections or entering and leaving freeways at high speed.
• • Certain sections of the road dry faster after rain or melt faster after snow. 
Always try  to stay in the best part of the lane.
Page  
192 Motorcycle Manual
It is almost impossible to maintain balance on ice, hard packed snow, or wet, 
slippery surfaces. Avoid them if possible. If it is impossible to avoid them, 
proceed across them in a straight line, but DO NOT adjust speed. Keep a 
center lane position and avoid the slippery area by riding slightly to the left 
or right of the center. Pull in the clutch and coast across. In some slippery 
areas, such as tollbooths, ride slightly to the left or right of the center to avoid 
problem areas.
UNEVEN SURFACES
Watch for uneven surfaces, such as bumps, broken pavement, potholes, or 
railroad tracks, while riding. If the condition is bad enough it could affect 
control of the motorcycle. 
Follow these guidelines to handle uneven surfaces:
• • Slow down to reduce impact.
• • Straighten out so that the motorcycle is upright.
• • Rise slightly on the foot pegs to absorb the shock.
Crossing railroad tracks
Cross railroad tracks at an angle. When turning to cross the tracks head on, it 
may be more dangerous than crossing at a slight angle. Turn slightly to cross 
something running parallel, such as trolley tracks, ruts in the middle of the 
road or a pavement seam. To cross something running next to the motorcy -
cle, move away far enough to be able to cross it at an angle. Then, just make 
a quick, sharp turn. Do not try to edge across it. It could catch the tires and 
upset balance.
This
Not this
Page  
193 Motorcycle Manual
Grooves and Gratings
When riding over rain grooves or metal bridge grating, the motorcycle will 
tend to wander back and forth. While this may be uneasy, it is not generally 
dangerous. Therefore, the best thing to do is ride relaxed and avoid abrupt 
maneuvers.
Sloping Surfaces
A road surface that slopes from one side to another is not difficult to handle 
when riding straight ahead. However, in a curve, a slope can make the turn 
harder if it is going the wrong way.
This image shows a rider turning left on a high crowned curve, a road that is 
higher in the middle than at the sides.
A turn to the left on a high crowned road is like a turn on a curve that is 
banked the wrong way. The crown makes the turn harder by:
• • Cutting down on the clearance between the left foot peg and the 
surface.
• • Adding the force of the down slope to the outward force of the turn, 
increasing the chance of a skid.
• • Making it necessary to turn uphill.
 
            High crowned curve
The only way to handle the wrong-way banking is to slow down. This will 
straighten the motorcycle and reduce the outward force.
Page  
194 Motorcycle Manual
Ride Cautiously at Night
At night, the ability to see and be seen is limited. With one headlight, it is 
hard to see the condition of the road or something on the road. At night, 
other motorists may also have a hard time distinguishing a motorcycle 
headlight and taillight from the stronger lights of other vehicles.
Here are some things that will help for riding at night:
use the high beam:  Use the high beam whenever you are not following or 
meeting a vehicle. Be able to stop within the lit distance.
reduce speed. If there is something lying in the road ahead, it will be 
difficult to see unless it is within proximity. When traveling too fast, it will be 
difficult to avoid hazards in the road. It is important to reduce speed at night, 
particularly on unfamiliar roads.
use the vehicle ahead. If there is a vehicle ahead, take advantage of it. Its 
lights can provide a better view of the road ahead than the motorcycle light. 
For example, vehicle taillights bouncing up and down may mean a bump or 
rough pavement is ahead.
Increase distance.  Distance is difficult to judge well at night. Make up 
for this by allowing extra distance from vehicles ahead. Leave more room 
on either side when riding alongside vehicles. Ensure there is enough 
distance to pass another vehicle.
Know Hazards
No matter how carefully a motorcyclist rides, there will always be “tight 
spots.” The chance of escaping safely depends on how quickly a rider reacts. 
Here is how to handle a few scenarios:
QUICK STOPS
Since the front brake supplies about three-quarters of the braking power, 
use it to stop quickly. Squeeze the brake lever steadily and firmly. Do not 
grab at it. Apply it without locking the front wheel.
The rear brake should be applied at the same time. Try not to lock the rear 
wheel.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
195
TIRE FAILURE
If the cycle starts handling differently, safely pull off the road and check the 
tires. Riders will more often feel a flat tire than hear it happen.
If the front tire goes flat, the steering will feel “heavy.” If the rear tire goes flat, 
the back of the motorcycle will tend to jerk from side to side. If a tire suddenly 
loses air, react quickly to keep balance by:
• • Concentrating on steering a straight course.
• • Gradually closing the throttle and coasting.
• • Edging toward the side of the road and stopping.
STUCK THROTTLE
Sometimes, when trying to close the throttle, it will not turn. If this happens 
when slowing down for traffic ahead or making a turn, react quickly to 
prevent a crash by: 
• • Immediately flip the engine cutoff switch and pull in the clutch at the 
same time. This disconnects the engine from the rear wheel and keeps 
riders from speeding up. After pulling the clutch, keep it in until stopped 
or the throttle is freed.
• • When unable to close the throttle, use the motor cutoff switch or the key 
to turn off the engine. For motorcycles without a cutoff switch or if the 
key is on the side of the cycle – stop, and then turn off the engine. 
After stopping, check the throttle cable carefully to find the source of the 
trouble. Make certain the throttle is working freely before continuing.
WOBBLE
At various speeds, the front wheel can sometimes begin to wobble (shake 
from side to side). To ride out a wobble:
• • Firmly grip the handlebars.
• • Do not fight the wobble.
• • Gradually close the throttle.  
(Do not apply the brakes; it could worsen the wobble.)
• • Let the motorcycle slow down.
Page  
196 Motorcycle Manual
Pull off the road as soon as possible. If carrying a heavy load, distribute the 
load more evenly. When at a gas station or using a tire gauge, check tire 
inflation. Other things that can cause a wobble are:
• • Bent or out-of-alignment wheel.
• • Poorly adjusted steering.
• • Improperly mounted or designed windshield.
• • Loose wheel bearings or loose spokes.
OFF THE ROAD
Do these two important things when leaving the roadway:
Check the roadside. Make sure the surface of the roadside is firm enough to 
ride on. If it is soft grass, loose sand, or unclear, slow nearly all the way before 
leaving the roadway. Since motorists behind might not expect this, make 
sure to check mirrors and signal clearly and early.
Pull well off the road. Get as far off the road as possible. A motorcycle by 
the side of the road is difficult to spot. Another vehicle may also leave the 
roadway, so it is important to be seen.
ROAD HAZARDS
Even a quick stop may not be enough to avoid hitting something. A piece of 
debris or a pothole might appear suddenly after the vehicle ahead passes 
over it, or the vehicle ahead might stop suddenly. The only way to avoid a 
crash is to make a quick turn or swerve.
To make a quick turn, lean the motorcycle quickly in the necessary direction: 
The sharper the turn, the more severe the lean.
To get the motorcycle to lean quickly, press on the inside of the handgrip in 
the necessary direction. To turn to the right, press on the inside of the right 
handgrip. This causes the front wheel to move slightly to the left and the 
motorcycle to continue straight ahead. The result is a lean to the right.
Self-demonstration: While riding in a straight line, press the inside of the 
right handlebar. Notice the motorcycle turns to the right. Practice making 
quick turns, so that it is second nature in an emergency.
Using this technique makes the motorcycle lean in a normal turn, too. Most 
riders do not notice it except on very sharp turns.
In an emergency, do not switch lanes and risk being hit by a vehicle. It is 
possible to squeeze by most obstacles without switching lanes. This is one 
scenario when the size of the motorcycle is favorable. Even if the obstacle is a 
vehicle, there is generally time to make sure there are no vehicles in the other 
lane.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
197
RIDING OVER OBJECTS
Sometimes there is no option but to ride over an object. Handling objects is a 
lot like riding over uneven surfaces. Here is what to do:
• • Hold onto the handle grips tightly.
• • Keep a straight course. This keeps the motorcycle upright and reduces 
the chance of falling on impact.
• • Rise slightly on the foot pegs. This allows legs and arms to absorb the 
shock and helps the rider from being bounced off when the rear wheel 
hits.
There are other ways of handling these obstacles. However, they require a 
lot of skill. The three steps above are a safe way to avoid obstacles found on 
highways. After riding over an object, always check tires for damage.
FLYING OBJECTS
Insects, cigarette butts thrown from vehicle windows, and rocks kicked 
up by the tires of other vehicles; any of these objects might strike riders. 
Without face protection, riders can be struck in the eye, the face or the 
mouth. Face protection still might become smeared or cracked, making it 
difficult to see. Whatever happens, do not let it affect motorcycle control. 
Watch the road and keep hands on the handlebars. As soon as it is safe, pull 
off the road and repair any damage.
ANIMALS
You should do everything you can to avoid hitting small animals. However, 
in traffic, do not swerve from the lane to avoid hitting an animal. There is a 
better chance of surviving impact with an animal than impact with another 
vehicle.
Motorcycles tend to attract dogs. Do not kick a chasing animal. It is too 
easy to lose control of the motorcycle. Instead, downshift and approach 
the animal slowly. After reaching the animal, speed up suddenly, leaving it 
behind quickly and helping the dog lose interest.
Page  
198 Motorcycle Manual
Carrying Passengers and Cargo
Before carrying a passenger or large loads, know how both could affect 
motorcycle operation. Extra weight changes the way the motorcycle handles 
– the way it balances, the way it turns, the way it speeds up and the way it 
slows down. Passengers that weigh less than the operator impact operation 
less than those who are heavier.
PASSENGERS
Guidelines to follow in carrying a passenger or cargo:
• • Check the motorcycle for adequate passenger-carrying equipment.
• • Instruct passengers before starting.
• • Adjust tires and shocks to account for the passenger’s weight.
To carry a passenger, the motorcycle must have:
a proper seat  
The seat must be large enough to hold the operator and passenger without 
crowding. Operators should not have to move any closer to the front of the 
motorcycle than normal. A passenger should not hang over the end of the 
seat.
Foot pegs  
The passenger must have a set of foot pegs. Without firm footing, an 
operator and passenger can both fall off.
Protective equipment  
A passenger must have the same type of protective equipment as the 
operator.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
199
INSTRUCTING PASSENGERS
Never assume any passenger knows proper motorcycle etiquette or rules of 
conduct. Provide complete instructions before starting.
A passenger should be told to:
• • Get on the motorcycle only after the engine has been started.
• • Sit as far forward as possible without crowding the operator.
• • Hold the operator’s waist, hips, or belt tightly.
• • Always keep both feet on the pegs, even when the motorcycle is stopped.
• • Look over the rider’s shoulder in the direction of turns and curves.
• • Stay directly behind the operator, leaning when the operator leans (in the 
same direction).
• • Avoid any unnecessary motion.
RIDING WITH A PASSENGER
When carrying a passenger, the motorcycle will respond more slowly. It takes 
longer to speed up, slow down, and turn. Heavier passengers and lighter 
motorcycles take longer to maneuver at these times. To adjust for added 
passenger weight:
• • Operate at a somewhat slower speed, particularly on corners, curves, or 
bumps.
• • Begin to slow down earlier than usual when approaching a stop.
• • Allow a greater following distance and keep more distance from vehicles 
on either side.
• • Look for larger gaps whenever crossing, entering, or merging in 
traffic.
If possible, warn passengers when starting, stopping quickly, turning sharply 
or riding over a bump. Otherwise, talk as little as possible when in motion.
Page  
200 Motorcycle Manual
LOAD AND CARGO
A motorcycle is not primarily designed to carry cargo. However, small loads 
can be carried safely when properly positioned and fastened. Check the 
motorcycle owner’s manual for information about carrying cargo.
• • Keep the load low.  Place the load next to the seat or place it in the 
saddlebags. Do not pile loads against a sissy bar or other backseat 
frames. This will change the center of gravity, disturbing the balance of 
the motorcycle.
• •  Keep the load forward. Place the load over or in front of the rear axle. 
Anything mounted behind the rear wheel can affect how the motorcycle 
turns and brakes. It can also cause wobbling.
• • Distribute the load evenly. When using saddlebags, make sure they are 
loaded equally. An uneven load can cause the motorcycle to pull to one 
side.
• • Secure the load.  Fasten the load securely with elastic cords or 
ropes. A loose load can catch in the wheel or chain. If this happens, 
the rear wheel may lock up and cause the motorcycle to skid.
• • check the load. Check the load every so often when stopped. Make 
sure it has not loosened or moved.
Learning Group Riding
The highway is not a place to socialize. Motorcyclists riding in groups do not 
have any special rights. When riding with others, do not interfere with the 
flow of traffic.
SIZE
A large group interferes with traffic and can force vehicles to attempt to 
pass a long line of motorcycles one at a time. Also, a large group tends to be 
separated easily by traffic or red lights. Those left behind may ride unsafely 
to catch up. Groups with more than four or five riders should divide into two 
or more smaller groups.
Planning ahead  
When leading, look ahead for changes. Give hand signals early, so the word 
spreads among the riders in plenty of time. Start lane changes early enough 
to allow all riders to complete the changes.
Putting beginners up front  
Place inexperienced riders behind the leader, and in a position where they 
can be watched from behind by more experienced riders.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
201
Following those behind  
Let the last in line or tailender set the pace. Use mirrors to keep an eye on the 
person behind. Slow down to let others catch up. If everyone does this, the 
group will stay with the rider on the tail end.
Knowing the route  
Make sure everybody knows the route. Obey any special rules on a particular 
route.
DISTANCE
It is important to keep close ranks and safe distance. A close group takes up 
less space on the highway, making the group easier to see. A close group 
is also less likely to be separated by traffic lights. However, it must be done 
properly.
Do not pair up  
Never operate directly alongside another motorcycle. There will be no place 
to escape or avoid another vehicle. Talk to another rider only when stopped.
Staggered formation  
Keep close ranks yet maintain adequate distance through a “staggered” 
formation. The leader rides to the left side of the lane, while the second 
rider stays a little behind and rides to the right side of the lane. A third rider 
would take a left position, a normal two-second distance behind the second 
rider. This formation allows the group to ride in close ranks without reducing 
following distance and without having riders drive alongside one another.
Staggered formation can be safely used on an open highway. However, a 
single file should be resumed on curves, during turns, while entering or 
leaving a highway, when returning to the narrow roadway or when topping 
the crest of a hill.
When riders in a staggered formation want to pass, they should do it one at 
a time. When it is safe to do so, the lead rider should pull out and pass. When 
the leader returns to the lane, he or she should take the left lane position and 
open a gap for the next rider. As soon as the first rider is safely by, the second 
rider should move to the left position and watch for a safe chance to pass. 
After passing, the rider should return to the right lane position and open a 
gap for the next rider.
2 seconds
Page  
202 Motorcycle Manual
Rider 1
Rider 2
Ride Sober and Awake
Riding a motorcycle is more demanding than driving other motor vehicles. 
Riders must be in good physical and mental shape to ride safely. Three 
things that often keep riders from being in shape to ride safely are alcohol, 
drugs, and fatigue.
ALCOHOL
Drinking and riding is extremely dangerous. Nearly half of all motorcycle 
highway deaths involve alcohol use. Riding a motorcycle requires a high 
degree of skill and judgment. It also requires a good sense of balance. 
Alcohol limits these skills.
It is dangerous to ride after drinking. Alcohol affects vision. Seeing clearly and 
judging distance becomes difficult. It is hard enough to ride a motorcycle 
safely with normal vision.
Drinking and driving is just as extensive among motorcyclists as it is among 
automobile drivers. However, motorcyclists are far more likely to be killed or 
severely injured in a crash. About 2,500 motorcycles are involved in crashes 
each year on New Jersey roadways. These crashes result in 60 or more 
fatalities and nearly 2,000 injuries in the Garden State.
No one is immune to the effects of alcohol. Alcohol makes everyone less able 
to think clearly and to perform physical tasks skillfully. Alcohol has extremely 
harmful effects on motorcycle operating skills. The effects of alcohol begin 
long before a rider is legally intoxicated.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
203
RIDE SAFE – RIDE SOBER
Drugs
Almost any drug can affect the skills needed to ride a motorcycle safely. 
This includes prescription drugs, as well as illegal drugs. It even includes 
such everyday drugs as cold tablets and allergy medication. Such drugs 
can cause weakness, dizziness or drowsiness. Understand the effects of 
any drugs you are taking before riding.
Do not take illegal drugs.
Stop and wait if dizziness or weakness from prescription or over-the-counter 
drugs occurs. Do not ride until regaining a normal feeling. When you resume 
riding, slow down, and maintain a greater than normal distance between 
your motorcycle and other vehicles.
Fatigue
Riding a motorcycle is more tiring than operating other vehicles. For road 
trips, tiredness sets in more quickly on a motorcycle. The effects of fatigue on 
vehicle control can also be much worse. To minimize risk:
• • Protect yourself from the elements. Wind, cold, and rain can make riders 
tire quickly. Dress warmly. A windshield is worth its cost, especially for 
riders that travel frequently.
• • Limit distance traveled. Do not cover more than about 300 miles a day.
• • Take frequent rests. Stop and get off the cycle. It is also a good idea to 
drink water during rest stops.
Page  
204 Motorcycle Manual
Checking the Motorcycle
Plenty of things on the highway can cause trouble for riders. A motorcycle 
should not be one of them. Three ways to be sure a motorcycle will not let its 
rider down are:
1. 1. Have the right equipment.
2. 2. Keep the bike in safe riding condition.
3. 3. Avoid add-on accessories or modifications that make it harder to handle.
MODEL
Selecting the right motorcycle is important. Beginners might want to 
consider a smaller motorcycle that is no more than 250cc until they become 
more experienced or until after driving several hundred miles. Make sure 
the motorcycle fits. A rider’s feet should be able to reach the ground while 
sitting.
There are a few items of equipment that are necessary for safe operation. 
New Jersey requires that all these items be in good working order:
• • Headlight and taillight.
• • Front and rear brakes.
• • Turn signals.
• • Horn.
• • At least one rearview mirror.
These are just minimum requirements. To survive in traffic, have a 
mirror on each side of the handlebars. It is also a good idea to have 
reflectors on the sides of the motorcycle.
SERVICE
Motorcycles may need more frequent mechanical attention than other 
vehicles. When something goes wrong with the motorcycle, it could result in 
a crash.
There is only one way to spot problems before trouble starts: Inspect the 
motorcycle carefully and fix things right away. The first section of this manual 
described checks that should be made before every ride. In addition, check 
these things at least once a week:
Motorcycle ManualPage  
205
tires 
Check the tread for wear. If the wear is uneven, have the wheels balanced 
and the alignment checked. Many blowouts are due to low air pressure. Also, 
check for cuts and scrapes that could cause a blowout.
Wheels  
Check both wheels for missing or loose spokes. Check the rims for cracks or 
dents. Lift the wheel off the ground and spin it. Watch its motion and listen 
for noise. Also, move it from side to side to check for looseness.
controls  
Check the controls for smooth operation. Check the cables for kinks or 
broken strands. Lubricate the control mechanisms at each end of the cable.
chains and sprockets  
Oil the chain. Check the sprockets for worn teeth.
Shock absorber  
Does the motorcycle “bounce” several times after crossing a bump? 
Hear a clunk? Check shock absorbers, which may need to be adjusted or 
replaced. Check the shocks for oil/leaks.
Fasteners  
Check for loose or missing nuts, bolts, or cotter pins. Keeping the motorcycle 
clean makes it easier to spot missing parts.
Brakes  
Adjust the brakes so that they lock the wheel when fully applied. If the wheel 
does not lock, or if there is a scraping sound when stopping, have the linings 
checked.
Page  
206 Motorcycle Manual
Accessories and Modifications
A safe motorcycle can quickly become a menace if the wrong accessories are 
added to it, or if changes are made to the motorcycle that can make it much 
harder to handle. Here are a few things to avoid:
Highway pegs  
Mounted on the front of the motorcycle to allow the rider to lean back. 
These pegs delay the operator’s ability to reach the foot brake in an 
emergency.
a Passenger Backrest  
Sometimes called a “sissy bar,” a high bar or a frame mounted on the 
back of the seat can change the motorcycle’s center of gravity, and 
affect its balance when loaded, and prevent the operator and passenger 
from getting off the motorcycle in a hurry.
extended handlebars  
Which extend above the operator’s shoulders are illegal in New Jersey.
Motorcycle ManualPage  
207
Page  
208
Page  
209
11
APPENDIX:  
Driver Safety
Page  
210
Traffic signs, signals, and road 
markings are set up to control 
the flow of traffic, making streets 
and highways safer for motorists, 
bicyclists, and pedestrians. A 
safe driver always watches for 
and obeys all traffic, signals, 
signs, and road markings. 
During heavy traffic or in an 
emergency, a police officer may 
direct traffic. A police officer 
can overrule traffic signals. Law 
enforcement orders or directions 
must always be obeyed. Court 
penalties will be imposed for 
stealing or damaging airport, 
traffic, or railroad-crossing signs 
or equipment. 
Page  
211 APPENDIX : DrIvEr SAfEty
TRAFFIC SIGNALS 
When traffic signals are hung vertically, the red light is always on top. The 
yellow is in the center. The green light is third in line. If there is a green 
arrow, it is always on the bottom. When the lights are horizontal, red is 
always on the left. 
RED LIGHT 
A motorist must stop before the intersection or crosswalk and remain 
stopped until the light changes to green. 
YELLOW LIGHT 
A motorist should stop before entering the intersection or crosswalk, unless 
his/her vehicle is so close to the intersection that it cannot be stopped 
safely. A yellow arrow means the signal is changing from green to red and 
gives the motorist a chance to stop safely. 
GREEN LIGHT 
A motorist should proceed through the intersection. Yield 
to pedestrians and vehicles still in the intersection and 
when turning left or right. Before making a left turn, yield 
to approaching vehicles. 
GREEN ARROW 
When shown alone or in combination with the red signal, 
proceed only as shown by the arrow. Be cautious and yield 
to pedestrians. 
FLASHING YELLOW LIGHT 
Slow down and proceed with care. 
FLASHING RED LIGHT 
Stop. Yield to traffic and pedestrians. Go only when 
safe. Flashing red lights at railroad crossings indicate an 
approaching train. Motorists must yield to the train. Go 
only when red lights stop flashing and when all other 
active warning devices deactivate. 
Page  
212 APPENDIX : DrIvEr SAfEty

UNLIT SIGNAL 
Stop if a signal does not have any of its bulbs working and no one is directing 
traffic. It is considered a four-way stop sign. Look left and right. Yield to traffic 
coming from the right or left. Be careful and go only when safe. 
ORANGE, STEADY RAISED-PALM 
SYMBOL 
Pedestrians must not leave the sidewalk or 
enter the roadway when facing the light. Those 
already in the roadway should quickly go to 
a safe spot. Pedestrians already within the cross -
walk will have time to cross the intersection 
before the signal changes. Those who have not 
yet left the sidewalk or curb should not enter 
the roadway. 
WHITE, STEADY PEDESTRIAN SILHOUETTE/ 
COUNTDOWN
Pedestrians facing the signal may 
cross the roadway in the direction of 
the signal. New Jersey law requires 
turning motorists to yield to pedes -
trians crossing on this signal and to 
pedestrians in the crosswalk. 
Pedestrian push buttons are located 
at certain traffic signals. A short time 
after the button is pushed, the flow of 
traffic at the intersection changes to a 
longer green for the side street. 
Traffic engineers use color, such as an optional yellow-green or standard 
yellow, for the pedestrian crossing and bicycle warning signs, which are of 
utmost importance. These signs alert New Jersey motorists that they must 
share the road with pedestrians and bicyclists and yield to them. 
Signs are divided into three basic categories: 
• • Warning: Warn motorists of hazards ahead that are difficult to see. 
• • Guidance: Guide motorists to a destination by clearly identifying the 
route. 
• • regulatory: Regulate traffic speed and movement. 
The signs are manufactured in different shapes and colors to convey a 
particular message. Examples of the various sign types, shapes and colors 
are found in the diagram on the next page. 
APPENDIX : DrIvEr SAfEtyPage  
213

COLOr SHAPENUMBE r Of 
SIDES MESSAGE
WhiteVertical 
rectangle4 Regulation (such as speed signs)1
BlueRectangle, 
square4 Motorists services and information
Brown Rectangle 4 Public recreation and scenic guidance
Green Rectangle 4 Direction guidance
Orange Diamond 4 Construction and maintenance warning
Red Octagon 8 STOP signs only
Red Triangle 3 YIELD signs
Yellow Pennant 3 No-passing warning signs
Yellow Pentagon 5 School signs
White X (NONE) Railroad crossing signs
Yellow Round (NONE) Railroad crossing advance warning signs
Yellow Diamond 4Roadway hazard and railroad crossing 
warning signs
1 When the maximum safe speed around a curve or turn is lower than 
the posted speed limit, an advisory speed sign is used with the proper 
warning sign. 
WARNING SIGNS 
Warning signs are for road conditions that need 
caution and for specific hazards that may be 
encountered during certain road operations. 
Some of the warning signs alert motorists to 
road conditions, deer crossings, railroad cross -
ings, school crossings or curved roadways. The 
signs are yellow and diamond-shaped with a 
black symbol or word message. 
Page  
214 APPENDIX : DrIvEr SAfEty
ROAD WORK SIGNS 
Road work signs alert motorists to a variety of 
temporary roadway conditions. It is important to 
look for: 
Orange, diamond-shaped signs that warn the 
motorist of lane closing, lane shifts, flaggers, uneven 
pavement, and detours. Road work may temporarily 
close lanes or divert them, changing traffic patterns. 
Reduced speed limit signs that are posted along -
side orange work zone signs. In New Jersey, all 
traffic fines are doubled in work zones. 
A motorist should react to road work signs by: 
• • Controlling the distance between his/her vehicle and the one in front, as 
well as his/her reaction time. Always read the signs, follow directions, and 
prepare to slow down or stop. 
• • Staying alert to the moving construction machinery in the work zone. 
With patience, a motorist will contribute to the overall safety of motorists 
and workers in the work zone. 
• • Watching for workers on the road, who risk injury or possibly death. 
Flaggers may stop and release traffic through the work zone.
Note: Flaggers have the same authority as a regulatory sign, so a motorist 
may be cited if he/she disobeys their directions. 
GUIDANCE SIGNS 
Guidance signs identify destinations and routes for motorists. 
Motorist Service Signs: Motorist service signs have white letters or 
symbols on a blue background and provide information about motorist 
services. 
REGULATORY SIGNS 
Regulatory signs are generally rectangular, with the longer vertical dimen -
sion, and have black wording and border on a white background. Some 
important regulatory signs to know are: 
• • StOP  
Octagonal sign with white wording and border on red background. 
• • yIELD  
White inverted triangle with red wording and border with a white border 
band. 
APPENDIX : DrIvEr SAfEtyPage  
215
• • CrOSS BUCK  
X-shaped railroad crossing sign with black wording on a white back -
ground means the same as a Yield sign. Motorists must always yield the 
right-of-way to trains. Trains cannot swerve to avoid motorists. 
• • DO NO t EN tEr 
White square with red circle that has a white band horizontally across the 
center of the circle and the words “DO NOT ENTER” in white letters on the 
upper and lower parts of the circle. 
Two national signs that indicate where certain interstate trucks can and 
cannot travel are now being used in New Jersey: 
• • Green  
Marks the routes and ramps where trucks are permitted; also marks the 
travel route to services and terminals. 
• • red 
Marks the routes and ramps where trucks are prohibited; also marks 
the end of designated routes. 
ROAD MARKINGS 
Road markings have the same force of law as signs or traffic signals. 
• • yellow center lines  
Separate traffic flow going in opposite directions. 
• • White lines  
Separate traffic going the same way when there is more than one lane; 
show edges of roads. 
• • Dashed lines  
On a motorist’s side of the center line of the road mean that passing is 
permitted when safe. 
• • Solid line  
On a motorist’s side of the center line means do not pass. 
• • road arrows  
When used with other signs, show the correct direction a motorist must 
take in that lane. 
• • White dashed lines  
Separate traffic lanes on multi-lane highways. 
• • Double yellow and white solid lines  
Prohibit passing. Do not cross the solid yellow line to pass. Stay in the lane. 
Keep to the right when driving slowly. 
Page  
216 APPENDIX : DrIvEr SAfEty
• • yellow solid and dashed lines  
Control passing. If the solid yellow line is on the motorist’s side of the road, 
do not pass. Pass only if the dashed line is on the motorist’s side of the 
road. A pass must be completed before the yellow dashed lines become 
solid. 
• • Edge lines       
Separate the shoulder from the travel lane and show the edges of   
highways; Yellow edge lines separate the shoulder from the travel lane  
and show the edge of the highway. 
• • White crosswalks       
Indicate pedestrian crossing areas. Pedestrians should use these areas   
 when crossing the road. At intersections where stop lines are missing   
 stop before the crosswalk when required to stop by traffic signs or signals  
 or for pedestrians. 
• • White stop lines       
Show where to stop at stop signs or traffic signals. 
• • White special markings       
Show special conditions, such as STOP AHEAD, SCHOOL, AND R X R, as   
 a motorist alert. At railroacrossings, there will be a crossbuck and some   
 crossings will include flashing red lights, ringing bells, and/or gates   
 lowered across the road as a train approaches. Pavement markings, signs,  
 and crossbucks are passive warning devices; flashing red lights, ringing   
 bells, and lowered gates are active warning signs. 
• • White diamonds     
 Indicate high occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes  
 reserved for a particular vehicle type or vehicles  
 carrying multiple riders, as identified by posted  
 regulatory signs. Such signs will also indicate  
 hours that HOV lanes are in operation. HOV  
 lanes may also be marked with white diamonds  
 painted on the pavement of the lane.
SPECIAL WARNING SIGNS 
These signs alert motorists to slow-moving vehicles. A fluorescent and reflec -
tive orange triangular sign indicates slow-moving vehicles, such as farm and 
construction equipment operating on public highways. The operators must 
obey all traffic rules and place a slow-moving vehicle sign on the back of 
their vehicles to warn approaching motorists. 
APPENDIX : DrIvEr SAfEtyPage  
217
RUMBLE STRIPS 
Transverse and longitudinal rumble strips are small indentions or narrow, 
raised strips on the highway or shoulder that are put there to alert the 
motorist that there is a decision point ahead (such as a four-way intersection 
after miles of uninterrupted travel). As the strips vibrate the steering wheel 
and make a noise, they will wake the motorist who may have dozed off or 
caution the motorist about the danger ahead. Rumble strips will not damage 
a vehicle. They are meant to get a motorist to drive more slowly. They are 
almost always used with a cautionary sign. 
SPEED BUMPS/SPEED HUMPS 
Other types of speed control devices include speed bumps and speed 
humps. A speed bump is a low ridge that runs across a street and that is 
designated to slow down cars. A speed hump is a longer, flatter version of a 
speed bump, which is more raised. 
ROUNDABOUTS 
A roundabout is a one-way, circular intersection 
in which traffic flows around a center island. 
Roundabouts are designed to meet the needs of all 
road users – drivers, pedestrians, pedestrians with 
disabilities, and bicyclists. A roundabout eliminates 
some of the conflicting traffic, such as left turns, 
which cause crashes at traditional intersections. 
Because roundabout traffic enters or exists only 
through right turns, the occurrence of severe 
crashes is substantially reduced.
Page  
218 APPENDIX : DrIvEr SAfEty
Page  
219 APPENDIX : DrIvEr SAfEty
Person with  a 
Disability
Flagman 
AheadCattle 
CrossingMergeSharp Turn 
Ahead
Yield Ahead
DetourSchoolHillDivided 
Highway
Signal Ahead
Road ClosedSlippery When 
WetLane Reduction 
AheadRoad Narrows
Hospital
WorkersCross RoadWinding RoadTwo-Lane 
Traffic
Page  
220 APPENDIX : DrIvEr SAfEty
Bike Lane
State Route 
MarkerSide RoadNo U-TurnsLeft Turn Only
Bike May Use   
Full Lane
Reserved 
ParkingNo Passing 
ZoneNo Parking 
Any TimeNo Trucks
No Standing 
 Any Time
Stop Here  
on RedStop Sign 
AheadDo Not PassMultiple 
Turning Lanes
Bicycles 
Present
U.S. Route 
MarkerAdvisory 
Ramp SpeedDo Not EnterStop
APPENDIX : DrIvEr SAfEtyPage  
221
Yield
Parallel Track 
SignBus/Car Pool 
LaneNo TurnsExit Marker
No Right Turn
Crossbuck 
 (Yield to Train)One WayLeft Turn OnlyMile Marker
Stop for 
Pedestrians   in 
Crosswalk
Rest AreaKeep RightInterstateRoad Closed
Wrong Way
RailroadLeft or  
Straight OnlyNo 
PedestriansCounty Route 
Marker
Page  
222 APPENDIX : DrIvEr SAfEty
Page  
223
12
APPENDIX:  
MVC Locations
With at least one location in each of New Jersey’s 21 counties, 
the MVC provides numerous customer services. Please refer 
to the following pages and/or www.njmvc.gov  for specific 
site information and appointment availability.
In the following pages, you will find the locations of MVC 
Licensing Centers and Vehicle Centers, as well as MVC Road 
Test and Inspection facilities. Also included in this chapter 
are details on hours of operation, appointments, and services 
offered, as well as contact information for general customer, 
surcharge, suspension, and other inquiries.
Page  
224
VEHICLE CENTERS
Hours of operation, 8 am-4:30 pm Mon-Fri and 8 am-3 pm Saturdays, closed Sundays.
Services include new registrations/titles (including transfers) for individuals; dealer & 
salvage registrations/titles in bulk; license plate transactions; renewals for registrations 
expired more than 6 months or ineligible for online renewal. Appointment-only, with 
exception of customers requesting 5-year abstracts, and handicapped placards.
LICENSING CENTERS
Hours of operation, 8 am-4:30 pm Mon-Fri and 8 am-3 pm Saturdays, closed Sundays.
Services include first-time licenses, non-driver IDs, and permits (including REAL ID  
option), out-of-state transfers, CDLs, TVRs (temporary visa-restricted licenses), knowl -
edge testing, and license renewals not eligible for online renewal. Walk-in services with -
out appointment are only available for permit validation, purchase of red reflectorized 
decals, 5-year abstracts, name and gender marker changes, and handicapped placards.
ROAD TEST CENTERS
Hours of operation, 8 am-5 pm Mon-Fri, closed Saturdays and Sundays.
Applicants for a NJ driver license must take a behind-the-wheel test at an MVC facility.  
Road tests are only available by appointment through our website, www.njmvc.gov . 
Some Road Test locations serve as first-time Licensing Centers, where drivers who pass 
their Road Test can have their driver license issued on site. We do not accept cash at 
these locations – only credit cards are accepted. (See page 233 for locations)
REGIONAL SERVICE CENTERS
Hours of operation, 8 am-5 pm, Mon-Fri, closed Saturdays and Sundays.
Among services offered are driver conferences for suspensions and restorations.
CENTRAL INSPECTION FACILITIES
Hours of operation, 8 am-4:30 pm Mon-Fri and 7 am-Noon Saturdays, closed Sundays.
Inspections for all types of standard vehicles are available at these facilities. Some 
facilities require an appointment. See www.njinspections.com  for more information.
PRIVATE INSPECTION FACILITIES
Hou rs of operation vary. 
More than 1,100 locations statewide, including at gas stations and body repair shops. 
These facilities will perform standard vehicle inspections for a fee. For a complete list of 
MVC-approved private inspection facilities visit www.njinspections.com .
Page  
225 APPENDIX : MVC LoCA tIoNs
Licensing Centers
Hours of operation, 8 am-4:30 pm Mon-Fri and 8 am-3 pm Saturdays, closed Sundays.
Services include first-time licenses, non-driver IDs, and permits (including REAL ID  option), 
out-of-state transfers, CDLs, knowledge testing, and license renewals not eligible for online 
renewal. Walk-in services without appointment are only available for permit validation, purchase 
of red reflectorized decals, 5-year abstracts, and name and gender marker changes, and 
handicapped placards. Please visit www.njmvc.gov  for appointment availability.
 
SUSSEX
PASSAIC C
WARRENW
MORRIS
ESSEX
HUNTERD ONUNIONN
SOMERSETSOMERSET
MIDDLESEX X
MERCER MONMOUTH
OCEAN
BURLIN GTON
CUMBERLANDATLANTI C
CAPE
MAYSALEMCAMDENCAMDENGLOUCESTERGLOUCESTERCCCDSONHUDDHUDBERGEN N
25
2627
28
Page  
226 APPENDIX : MVC LoCA tIoNs
Licensing Centers 
Hours of operation, 8 am-4:30 pm Mon-Fri and 8 am-3 pm Saturdays, closed Sundays.
Services include first-time licenses, non-driver IDs, and permits (including REAL ID  option), 
out-of-state transfers, CDLs, knowledge testing, and license renewals not eligible for online 
renewal. Walk-in services without appointment are only available for permit validation, purchase 
of red reflectorized decals, 5-year abstracts, and name and gender marker changes, and 
handicapped placards. Please visit www.njmvc.gov  for appointment availability.
Newton
51 Sparta Avenue
Newton, NJ 07860
Oakland
350 Ramapo Valley 
Road
Suite 24, 
Oakland NJ 07436
Wayne
481 Route 46 West
Wayne, NJ 07470
Paterson
125 Broadway
Suite 201, 
Paterson, NJ 07505
Lodi
8 Mill Street  
(off Garibaldi Avenue)
Lodi, NJ 07644
Randolph
160 Canfield Avenue
Randolph, NJ 07869
Newark
228 Frelinghuysen 
Avenue
Newark, NJ 07114
North Bergen
8901 Bergenline 
Avenue
North Bergen, NJ 
07047
Washington
404 E Washington 
Avenue
Washington, NJ 
07882
Flemington
181-B Routes 31 & 202
Ringoes, NJ 085512
3
4
5
6
7
81
9
10Rahway
1140 Woodbridge Road 
and East Hazelwood 
Avenue
Rahway, NJ 07065
Bayonne
Route 440 and 1347 
Kennedy Boulevard
Family Dollar Plaza
Bayonne, NJ 07002
Elizabeth
17 Caldwell Place
Elizabeth, NJ 07201
South Plainfield
5000 Hadley Road, 
Suite 102
South Plainfield, NJ 
07080
Edison
45 Kilmer Road
Edison, NJ 08817
Bakers Basin
3200 Brunswick Pike 
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
Freehold
811 Okerson Road
Freehold, NJ 07728
Eatontown
109 Route 36
Eatontown, NJ 07724
Delanco
400 Creek Road
Delanco, NJ 08075
Toms River
1861 Hooper Avenue
Village Square
Toms River, NJ 0875311
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20Manahawkin
712 East Bay Avenue
Manahawkin Plaza
Suite 9  
Manahawkin, NJ 08050
Runnemede
835 East Clements  
Bridge Road
Runnemede Plaza
Runnemede, NJ 08078
Camden
2600 Mount Ephraim 
Avenue
Suite 400
Camden, NJ 08104
West Deptford
215 Crown Point Road  
(I-295 exit 20)
Thorofare, NJ 08086
Salem
The Finlaw Building
199 East Broadway, 1st 
Floor
Salem, NJ 08079
Cardiff
6725 Black Horse Pike
Harbor Square
Egg Harbor Township, 
NJ 08234
Vineland
9 West Park Avenue
Vineland, NJ 08360
Rio Grande
3305 Bay Shore Road
Breakwater Shopping 
Plaza
North Cape May, NJ 
0820421
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
APPENDIX : MVC LoCA tIoNsPage  
227
Vehicle Centers
Hours of operation, 8 am-4:30 pm Mon-Fri and 8 am-3 pm Saturdays, closed Sundays. 
Services include new registrations/titles (including transfers) for individuals; duplicate titles, 
dealer & salvage registrations/titles in bulk; license plate transactions; renewals for registra -
tions expired more than 6 months or are ineligible for online renewal. Appointment-only, with 
exception of customers requesting 5-year abstracts, and handicapped placards. Please visit 
www.njmvc.gov  for appointment availability.
13
14
15
1617
1819
Page  
228 APPENDIX : MVC LoCA tIoNs
Vehicle Centers 
Hours of operation, 8 am-4:30 pm Mon-Fri and 8 am-3 pm Saturdays, closed Sundays. 
Services include new registrations/titles (including transfers) for individuals; duplicate titles, 
dealer & salvage registrations/titles in bulk; license plate transactions; renewals for registra -
tions expired more than 6 months or are ineligible for online renewal. Appointment-only, with 
exception of customers requesting 5-year abstracts, and handicapped placards. Please visit 
www.njmvc.gov  for appointment availability.
Newton
51 Sparta Avenue
Newton, NJ 07860
Washington
404 E Washington Avenue
Washington, NJ 07882
Wallington
450 Main Avenue
Wallington Square
Wallington, NJ 07057
East Orange
183 South 18th Street
Suite B
East Orange, NJ 07018
Springfield
271 Route 22 East
Springfield, NJ 07081
Jersey City
438 Summit Avenue
Jersey City, NJ 07307
Somerville
10 Roosevelt Place
Somerville, NJ 08876
Hazlet
1374 Highway 36
Airport Plaza
Hazlet, NJ 07730
South Brunswick
2236 Route 130 North
Dayton, NJ 08810
Trenton
120 South Stockton Street
Trenton, NJ 086081
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10Lakewood
1195 Route 70
Leisure Center, Store 9
Lakewood, NJ 08701
Cherry Hill
1 Executive Campus at Cherry Hill
Route 70
Cherry Hill, NJ 08002
Medford
175 Route 70
Suite 25
Sharp’s Run Plaza
Medford, NJ 08055
Manahawkin
712 East Bay Avenue
Manahawkin Plaza
Suite 7
Manahawkin, NJ 08050
Turnersville
5200 Route 42 North
Ganttown Plaza
Turnerville, NJ 08012
Rio Grande
3305 Bay Shore Road
Breakwater Shopping Plaza
North Cape May, NJ 08204
Salem
The Finlaw Building
199 East Broadway, 1st Floor
Salem, NJ 08079
Cardiff
6725 Black Horse Pike
Harbor Square
Egg Harbor Township, NJ 08234
Runnemede
835 East Clements  
Bridge Road
Runnemede Plaza
Runnemede, NJ 0807811
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
APPENDIX : MVC LoCA tIoNsPage  
229
Page  
230 APPENDIX : MVC LoCA tIoNs
Regional s ervice Centers
Hours of operation, 8 am-5 pm, Mon-Fri, closed Saturdays and Sundays.
Services include driver conferences and appeals for suspensions and restorations.
*Regional Service Centers are located within MVC Licensing Centers with the exception of 
Trenton, which is an MVC Vehicle Center.
SUSSEX
PASSAIC
WARREN
MORRIS
ESSEX
HUNTERDONUNION
SOMERSET
MIDDLESEX
MERCER MONMOUTH
OCEAN
BURLINGTON
CUMBERLANDATLANTIC
CAPE
MAYSALEMCAMDENGLOUCESTERHUDSONBERGEN
1Wayne
481 Route 46 West
 Wayne, NJ 07470
2Paterson
125 Broadway, Suite 201
Paterson, NJ 07505
3Newark
228 Frelinghuysen Avenue
Newark, NJ 07114
4trenton
120 South Stockton Street
Trenton, NJ 08608
5Eatontown
109 Route 36  
Eatontown, NJ 07724
6West Deptford
215 Crown Point Road 
(I-295 exit 20)
Thorofare, NJ 08086
Page  
231 APPENDIX : MVC LoCA tIoNs
Road t esting
Hours of operation, 8 am-5 pm Mon-Fri, closed Saturdays and Sundays. 
Applicants for a NJ driver license must take a behind-the-wheel test at an MVC facility. Road 
tests are only available by appointment through the NJMVC website, www.njmvc.gov .
SUSSEX
PASSAIC C
WARRENW
MORRIS
ESSEX
HUNTERD ONUNIONN
SOMERSETSOMERSET
MIDDLESEX X
MERCER MONMOUTH
OCEAN
BURLIN GTON
CUMBERLANDATLANTI C
CAPE
MAYSALEMCAMDENCAMDENGLOUCESTERGLOUCESTERCCCDSONHUDDHUDBERGEN N
1
23
4
5
6
7 8
9
10
1211
13
14
15
Page  
232 APPENDIX : MVC LoCA tIoNs
Road t esting
Hours of operation, 8 am-5 pm Mon-Fri, closed Saturdays and Sundays. 
Applicants for a NJ driver license must take a behind-the-wheel test at an MVC facility. Road 
tests are only available by appointment through the NJMVC website, www.njmvc.gov .
Wayne *
481 Route 46 West
Wayne, NJ 07470
Lodi*
8 Mill Street  
(off Garibaldi Avenue)
Lodi, NJ 07644
Randolph
160 Canfield Avenue
Randolph, NJ 07869
Newark
228 Frelinghuysen Avenue
Newark, NJ 07114
Rahway *
1140 Woodbridge Road and East 
Hazelwood Avenue
Rahway, NJ 07065
Edison
45 Kilmer Road
Edison, NJ 08817
Bakers Basin *
3200 Brunswick Pike  
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
Eatontown *
109 Route 36
Eatontown, NJ 07724
Delanco *
400 Creek Road
Delanco, NJ 080751
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9Cherry Hill * 
617 Hampton Road
Cherry Hill, NJ 08802
Miller Air Park
Route 530 and Mule Road
Berkeley Township, NJ 08757
Winslow
550 Spring Garden Road
Ancora, NJ 08037
salem
185 Salem Woodstown Road
Salem,  NJ 08079
Mays Landing
1477 19th Street
Hamilton Industrial Park
Mays Landing, NJ 08330
Cape May
Cape May Airport
507 Terminal Drive
Erma, NJ 08242
Basic auto test only,  
Wednesdays only10
11
12
13
14
* Road Test locations serve as first-time Licensing Centers, where drivers who pass their 
Road Test can have their driver license issued on site. We do not accept cash at these 
locations – only credit cards are accepted. 15
APPENDIX : MVC LoCA tIoNsPage  
233
Vehicle Inspection 
Hours of operation, 8 am-4:30 pm Mon-Fri and 7 am-Noon Saturdays, closed Sundays.
Inspections for all types of standard vehicles are available at these facilities. Some facilities 
require an appointment. Visit www.njinspections.com  for more information.
SUSSEX
PASSAIC
WARREN
MORRIS
ESSEX
HUNTERDONUNION
SOMERSET
MIDDLESEX
MERCER MONMOUTH
OCEAN
BURLINGTON
CUMBERLANDATLANTIC
CAPE
MAYSALEMCAMDENGLOUCESTERHUDSONBERGEN
Page  
234 APPENDIX : MVC LoCA tIoNs
Vehicle Inspection 
Hours of operation, 8 am-4:30 pm Mon-Fri and 7 am-Noon Saturdays, Closed Sundays.
Inspections for all types of standard vehicles are available at these facilities. Some facilities 
require an appointment. Visit www.njinspections.com  for more information.
1Newton
90 Moran Street
Newton, NJ 07860
2Wayne
481 Route 46 West
Wayne, NJ 07470
3Paramus
20 W. Century Road
Paramus, NJ 07652
4Lodi
8 Mill Street
Lodi, NJ 07644
5Washington
Route 31 North
Washington, NJ 07882
Appointment Only
6Randolph
160 Canfield Avenue
Randolph, NJ 07869
7secaucus
County Avenue and  
Secaucus Road  
Secaucus, NJ 07094
8Newark
228 Frelinghuysen Avenue
Newark, NJ 07114
9Flemington
181 Routes 31 & 202
Ringoes, NJ 08551
10Rahway
1140 Woodbridge Road
Rahway, NJ 07065
11Kilmer
33 Kilmer Road
Edison, NJ 08817
12south Brunswick
2236 Route 130
Dayton, NJ 08810
13Bakers Basin
3200 Brunswick Pike
Lawrenceville, NJ 0864814Freehold
801 Okerson Road
Freehold, NJ 07728
15Eatontown
109 Route 36
Eatontown, NJ 07724
16southampton
1875 Route 38
Southampton, NJ 08088
17Lakewood
1145 Route 70
Lakewood, NJ 08701
18Cherry Hill
617 Hampton Road
Cherry Hill, NJ 08002
19Deptford
725 Tanyard Road
Deptford, NJ 08096
20Manahawkin
220 Recovery Road
Manahawkin, NJ 08050
21Winslow
250 Spring Garden Road
Ancora, NJ 08037
22salem
185 Salem Woodstown Road
Salem, NJ 08079
Appointment Only
23Millville
1406 Wheaton Avenue
Millville, NJ 08332
24Mays Landing
1477 19th Street
Mays Landing, NJ 08330
25Cape May
6 West Shellbay Avenue
Cape May, NJ 08210
Appointment Only
APPENDIX : MVC LoCA tIoNsPage  
235
Page  
236
Page  
237
Lock it then Pocket 
Your Key Fob
More than 1 million vehicles are stolen 
across the U.S. every year.
Don’t make it easy.   
Prevent Vehicle Theft. 
Always remember to Lock it then 
Pocket your key fob and take it with you.  
Page  
238
Page  
239
General Customer Information
(609) 292-6500
If you are deaf or hard of hearing, please use 7-1-1 NJ Relay.
Customer service representatives are available Monday through Friday, 8:30 am to 4:15 pm 
Detailed recorded information is available after-hours, seven days a week, including holidays.
Motor Vehicle Commission  
P.o. Box 403  
trenton, NJ 08666-0403  
www.njmvc.gov
Suspensions/Violations/Restorations
(609) 292-7500  
Motor Vehicle Commission  
P.O. Box 134  
Trenton, NJ 08666-0403
Vehicle Inspection Information
(888) NJM oto R (888-656-6867) toll-free in New Jersey  
(609) 895-6886 out of state  
www.njinspections.com
Customer service representatives are available Monday through Friday 8 am to 4:30 pm, 
and Saturday 7 a.m. to noon.
To Pay a Surcharge Bill
NJ-SVS  
P.O. Box 1502  
Moorestown, NJ 08057-9704
To Return License Plates
Motor Vehicle Commission  
P.O. Box 129  
Trenton, NJ 08666-0129
Complaint About a Driving School’s Performance
Motor Vehicle Commission  
Business License Services Bureau  
P.O. Box 170  
Trenton, NJ 08666-0170  
mvcBL sinvestigations@mvc.nj.govCoNtACt INFoRMA tIoN
Page  
240

www.njmvc.gov R0724
GOVERNOR
PHILIP D. MURPHY
LT. GOVERNOR
TAHESHA WAY
ACTING CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR
LATRECIA LITTLES-FLOYD

